Homosexual Love in the Nineteenth Century

n

•

>-

V

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in

2015

https://archive.org/details/strangershomosexOOrobb

STRANGERS

Also by Graham Robb

BALZAC

\lCTOR HUGO

RIMBAUD

Graham Robb

STRANGERS
Homosexual Love in the
Nineteenth Century

W. W. Norton & Company

New York London

——

Copyright © 2003 by Graham Robb
First American Edition 2004

All rights reserved

Printed in the United States of America

For information about permission to reproduce selections from
this book, write to Permissions, W. W. Norton

500 Fifth Avenue, New York,

& Company, Inc.,

NY 10110

Manufacturing by The Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing Group
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Robb, Graham, 1958homosexual love in the nineteenth century /
Graham Robb. 1st American ed.
p. cm.
Also published in London by Picador, 2003.
Included bibliographical references and index.

Strangers

:

—

ISBN 0-393-02038-X

—

—

Homosexuality Europe History. 2. Homosexuality
United States History. 3. Gays Europe History. 4. Gays
United States History. 5. Homophobia Europe History. 6.
Hom.ophobia United States History. I. Title: Homosexual
1.

—
—
—

—
—

—
—

—

love in the 19th century. II. Title

HQ76.3.E8R63 2004
2003066239
306.76^6T94— dc22

W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y 10110

W. W. Norton & Company Ltd.
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London

1234567890

WIT 3QT

Contents

List of Illustrations vii

1 .

Prejudice

i

PART ONE
2

In the Shadows 17

.

Country of the Blind 40

3 .

4

.

Outings 84

PART TWO
5

Miraculous Love 125

Society of Strangers 156

6.
7

.

.

A Sex of One’s Own 174

PART THREE

10

.

8.

Eairy Tales 197

9

GentleJesus 233

.

Heroes of Modern Life 253
[v]

Contents

APPENDICES
I.

II.

Criminal Statistics 272

‘A Categoric Personal Analysis for the Reader’ 276
III.

Map of Uranian Europe 278-9

Acknowledgements 280

Notes 281

Works Cited 307
Index 332

[vi]

List of Illustrations

1.

John Martin, The Destruction of Sodom. (William Weston Gallery)

2.

‘The Toilet at the Station’. (British Library)

3.

‘Closing Scene at the Old Bailey’. (British Library)

4.

Ambroise Tardieu. (Department of Forensic Pathology, University of
Sheffield)

5.

Johann Ludwig Casper. (Department of Forensic Pathology, University
of Sheffield)

6.

Carl Friedrich Otto Westphal. (GesundArchiv, Humboldt University)

7.

Albert Moll. (GesundArchiv, Humboldt University)

8.

Richard von Kraffi-Ebing (Krafft-Ebing Collection / The Wellcome
Trust)

9.

‘Man-woman criminals’, by Cesare Lombroso. (Bodleian Library)

10. Earl Lind,

from Autobiography of an Androgyne.

11.

George Gatlin, ‘O’n-daig, the Crow’. (Smithsonian Institution)

12.

Lord Arthur Clinton, MP, Frederick Park (‘Fanny’) and Ernest Boulton
(‘Stella,

13.

Star of the Strand’). (Essex Record Office)

‘The Ladies of Llangollen’. (Bodleian Library)

Anne Lister. (Calderdale Museums & Arts, Shibden Hall)
15. Edward Carpenter and George Merrill. (Sheffield Archives)
14.

16.

‘Walt Whitman & his rebel soldier friend Pete Doyle’, by Moses
P. ‘Rice.

(Bodleian Library)

17. Radclyffe Hall and Lady

Una Troubridge. (Hulton Getty)

18.

Gay Amsterdam in the late 19th century. {Spiegel Historiael, October

19.

The Rat Mort, a lesbian cafe. (Bibliotheque Nationale de France)

20.

Unter den Linden, Berlin. (Corbis)

1982)

21. Heinrich Hossli, ‘the milliner of Glams’. (Bodleian Library)
22. Karl Heinrich Ulrichs. (Bodleian Library)
23.

Rosa Bonheur, in

Jahrbuch fur sexuelle Zwischenstufen. (Bodleian

Library)
24.

Conrad Veidt and Magnus Hirschfeld, in Anders als die Anderen.
(GayKitschCamp, Lille)

[vii]

List of lllust7'ations

25

.

26

.

27

.

‘Berlin Census in a Thoroughly Modern Home’, by Erich Wilke.

(Taylor Institution)

28

.

Havelock Ellis. (Bodleian Library)
Richard Burton in Arab dress. (National Portrait Gallery)
Caricature of Erank Harris, by Alax Beerbohm. (Bridgeman Art
Library)

29
30

.

.

‘Merry Robin stops a Stranger in Scarlet’. (Bodleian Library)

Erom the English translation of Adolphe Belot’s Miss Giraud, My Wife.
(Bodleian Library)

31

.

32

.

Sherlock Holmes and Irene Adler. (Bodleian Library)

Jean Delville, L’Ecole de Platon. (Bridgeman x\rt Library)

[viii]

1

Prejudice

I

have seen with my own eyes the most beautiful examples

of something that we know only from Greek traditions. I

was able to observe, as an attentive scientist, its physical
and moral aspects. It is a subject about which one can hardly
speak, let alone write, and so

I

shall save

it

for future

conversations.

Goethe to Duke Karl August, Rome, 29 December 1787

that most horrid, detestable, and sodomitical crime
(among Christians not to be named) called Buggery.
[.

.

.]

Indictment of Rev. John Church, Surrey Assizes, 1817

M

ore than once, while working on this book, I left the age of
top-hats and bustles to find the world outside strangely similar.

A librarian, whispering to a colleague, referred to the titles I had
requested from a closed collection as ‘naughty books’. A French
bookseller kept the gay and lesbian books behind the cash register so
that they had to be asked for in person.

The Director of the State

photographic archive in St Petersburg refused to supply a photograph
that would be used in a book about homosexual love. Acquaintances

volunteered ancient ideas about homosexuality as

Cro-Magnon

if

blandly intro-

Sympathy was
expressed for members of my family who might be asked what I
ducing

a

pet dinosaur or a

parent.

Strangers
was writing. I was praised, disconcertingly (and mistakenly) for my
courage and teased for my opportunism - dabbling in prurience to
sell

more books. I was asked which famous people I was hoping

to ‘out’, usually with the implication that my suppositions would be
wrong. Some people wondered whether the book would be ‘for’ or
‘against’.

Others, knowing the subject to be homosexuality, offered

scraps of information

on Victorian child molesters and spectacular

sex crimes. Scholars in Britain, France and the United States wished

me a speedy return to biography and literary history.
Few subjects give such a vivid sense of the living past. In fact, most
of the chapters in this book overshot their intended finishing-line
(the First

Proust’s

World War) and ended up in the late 20th century. In

A la recherche du temps perdu^ a character jokes that if Baron

de Charlus, a notorious ‘invert’, keeps fluttering his eyelashes at the
conductor, the train will start going backwards. This joke, in various
forms,

is

still

being

told.

Public behaviour towards gay

men and

women has changed enormously, but private ideas about homosexuality are much what they were 200 years ago.

On reflection, none of this was surprising. I had my own unexamined

sludge of preconceptions,

but one important advantage: a

familiarity with the novels of Balzac, the lives of Rimbaud and Verlaine, and the complicated reasons behind Baudelaire’s first choice of

a title for his

poems, Les Leshiennes. Over a period of about fifteen

years, this research

had turned up some curious fragments of what

seemed to be a vanished civilization. Most of it was news even to
friends with an interest in gay history. It seemed a good idea to pass

on the information and to spend three years reading everything I
could find about the lost world.
*

The subject of

this book is homosexual love in Europe and
America the obstacles it encountered and the societies it created. It
is

not intended to be a check-list of famous homosexuals. Prominent

people who left a written record of their feelings inevitably account
for a large proportion of the evidence, but a social history should

leave as much room as possible for the mass of humanity known as

‘ordinary people’. It is no more accurate to make Oscar Wilde the

Prejudice
emissary of 19th-century homosexuality than it is to see Queen \^ctoria as a typical Victorian. Though some of the texts quoted in this

book might come as a surprise to some readers, this is not an exercise
in pinning sexual labels on conspicuous individuals.

The ‘strangers’ of the title are lesbians as well as gay men. In sexual
history, lesbians are often treated separately, for political and practical

reasons, but the similarities in the lives of gay men and women are

strong and significant enough to make them part of the same story.
Whatever the intention, the historical segregation of men and women
aggravates the lack of evidence and helps to keep lesbian history in
the dark.

Perhaps the trickiest problem lay in the fact that almost everyone
already has a theory about homosexuality - its history and its causes.

The commonest notions appear to be a) that homosexuality never
used to be mentioned and was not even known to exist; b) that
homosexuality is on the increase.

These theories are impressions, not conclusions. It is remarkable

how often a person who insists that homosexuality is a very recent
development will, if kept on the subject, eventually remember several
earlier instances,

both male and female, in or outside the family, of

the species that was supposed not to exist.

The idea that homosexuality is peculiar to certain periods reflects
a natural tendency to confuse one’s own history with the history of
society. In

almost everyone’s experience, sexual activity is always on

the increase, from infancy to early adulthood and sometimes far

beyond. If the theory of homosexual proliferation had always been
correct, the ‘strangers’ of this

book would have been heterosexual

rather than homosexual. For a thousand years at least, people have

been complaining that sodomites, margeries, homosexuals or gays are

more prevalent than ever before.
1102 - ‘This sin is now so frequent that no one blushes for it any more,
and many indulge in it without perceiving its gravity.’ (St Anselm)
1663 - ‘Sir J Mennes and Mr Batten both say that buggery is now
almost grown as common among our gallants as in Italy, and that the
very^ pages of the town begin to complain of their masters for

(Samuel Pepys)

[3]

it.’

Strangers
1 149 - ‘Till

of late Years, Sodomy was a Sin, in a manner unheard of

‘We have but too much Reason to fear, that there
Numbers yet undiscover’d, and that this abominable Practice gets
Ground ev’ry Day.’ (‘Plain Reasons for the Growth of Sodomy in

in these Nations.’

are

England’, in Satan's Harvest Home)

1811 - ‘The grand feature, I take it, in the last year of our history,
is

I

the

enormous increase of Paiderastia

[.

.

.]

At no place or time,

suppose, since the creation of the world, has Sodomy been so rife.’

(C. S. Matthews to Byron)
c.

1850 - ‘The increase of these monsters in the shape of men, com-

monly designated Margeries, Poojfs,

&c., of late years, in the great

metropolis, renders it necessary for the sake of the public, that they

should be made known.’ {Yokel's Preceptor)

1881 - ‘Immorality, used in a special sense, which I need not define,
has been of late increasing among the upper classes in England, and
specially in the great cities.

[.

.

.]

There is amply sufficient ground for

alarm that the nation may be on the eve of an age of voluptuousness and
reckless immorality.’

(Canon J. M. Wilson, Morality in Public Schools)

1884 - ‘Since my lectures on this subject in 1881, anal deformations
caused by this unnatural act have regrettably become more and more

numerous, proving that lustful acts are increasing by the day.

[.

.

.]

Sapphism and sodomy are growing at an unheard-of rate.’ (Dr Louis
Martineau, Legons sur les deformations vulvaires et anales)

1930 - ‘The question of homosexuality hovers over society like

a

ghostly scarecrow. In spite of all the condemnation, the number of
perverts seems to be on the increase.’ (Alfred Adler, Das Problem der

Homosexualitdt)

The complementary notion that homosexuality has a particular
cause is more durable. Information about homosexuality from books,
the media, personal experience and gossip still tends to be treated as
diagnostic rather than descriptive, as if the ultimate aim were still to
find a cure.

The following brief deluge of commonly adduced causes will at
least make it possible to see personal favourites in a broader context.

Most of these explanations were seriously proposed and sometimes
formed the basis of a career in medicine, psychiatry, criminal anthropology or sociology. The list is based on about 350 texts dating from

[4]

Prejudice
the late 18th century to the early 20th century. Many of these ‘causes’
will be mentioned later on. The idea at this stage is simply to show

the general direction of thought. For the sake of convenience, the

explanations are divided into approximate categories.

Physiological

- regional or ethnic features such as beauty, ugliness or genital
conformation (especially size)
- climate (especially temperature and altitude)
- chemical imbalance caused by diet or soil

- impotence or sterility (congenital or accidental - e.g. excessive
horse-riding)

- ‘abnormal conditions of the anterior lobe of the pituitary body’
- a failure to pass through puberty due to poor diet and living
conditions

- excessive meat-eating
- lack of physical exercise

- physical impediments to intercourse
- venereal disease
- epilepsy
- anaemia
- masturbation
- drug abuse (especially opium and alcohol)
- atavistic hermaphroditism
-

a foetal deformation causing the genital nerves to end at the rectum

- excessive application of enemas
- castration or ovariotomy

- parents of widely different ages (especially old father and young
mother)

Psychological and Parapsychological

-

fear of contracting venereal disease (‘syphilophobia’)

-

fear of pregnancy

- population density, large family or physical degeneracy triggering
an instinctive form of contraception
- regression to a prehuman era when the hindquarters were the

primary visual stimulant
- curiosity or boredom

[5]

Strangers
- books about homosexuality
- misogyny or androphobia

- sexual abstinence or indulgence
- homosexual rape, especially in childhood
- lack of parental love
- overbearing mothers
- disappointment in heterosexual love
- celibacy
- marriage
- shyness
- insanity (e.g. satyriasis, nymphomania or ‘erotic delirium’)
- sexual position adopted by parents at the moment of conception
- the mother’s desire for a child of the other sex
- the absence of the father during pregnancy

- the mother’s reading (e.g. oriental tales) or unusually strong desire
for men during pregnancy

- planetary alignments at birth (especially Uranus)

Social

- migrations (the westward spread of Bulgarians, the Norman
Invasion, etc.)

- religious influences (Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, pagan, etc.)
- atheism and lack of religious constraints
- unisexual institutions such as convents, boarding-schools, prisons
and the armed forces
- foreign fashions and bad examples (especially Oscar Wilde)

- polygamy (in the Orient) leading to satiety in the upper classes
and lack of women in the lower classes
- aristocratic over-refinement
- plebeian brutishness
- the social acceptability of non-procreative sex
- the emancipation of women
- the decriminalization of homosexual acts
- ‘loosening of moral fibre’
It is

not as easy as one might hope to arrange these explanations

of homosexuality in chronological order. Some are still quite popular
in

the 21st century: homosexuality

is

a

love of physical beauty

inherited from the Ancient Greeks; homosexuality is a result of mental

[

6]

Prejudice
or physical immaturity; homosexuality

is

caused by other

homo-

sexuals, especially by those who work in schools or the mass media.

These apparently diverse explanations - the social, the physical and
the metaphysical - are fundamentally similar. They all reflect a desire
to find a cause. Whether homosexuals are thought to originate in the

Garden of Eden with Adam’s first wife Lilith, at the dawn of evolution in sexually undifferentiated organisms, or in a gene in the Xq28

region of the X chromosome, the essential idea is that they must have

come from somewhere.

The tail-chasing nature of this search for origins is especially
obvious in the lively domain of sexual geography. This book was
to have contained a

comprehensive map of the imagined spread of

homosexuality in the western world, but early sketches quickly pro-

duced an illegible mass of two-directional arrows. While ‘the Italian
vice’ crept into Britain,

‘/7

vizio inglese’ (also applied to flagellation)

was heading south to Naples and Capri. In France, Tamour allemand^
crossed the Rhine like an invading army. Meanwhile, ^die franzosische

Krankheit\ carried by pornography and dilettantes, conducted a
counter-offensive, turning cities into open-air brothels and respectable women into lesbians.

Romanians traced homosexuals back to Turkey, Turks traced
them to Persia, and Persians to a remote Persian province. In 1810,
when a flourishing club of ‘mollies’ was discovered in a London
pub, two newspapers blamed ‘the evil’ on the Napoleonic wars:
too many foreign servants and too many Englishmen exposed to
foreign customs. In Paris, a supposed increase in ‘pederasty’ in the

1840s was

attributed

to

the

conquest of Algeria:

according to

the Marquis de Boissy, troops had brought the ^mal d^orient^ home
like

a

tropical disease. Later, the surge of bourgeois sex tourists

fi*om Britain, France

and Germany convinced Algerians (according

to Andre Gide) that ‘these tastes came to them from Europe’. Even

the Atlantic Ocean was useless as a cordon sanitaire. In 1842, a New

York journal called the Whip noted with some relief that, among the
sodomites infesting the city, ‘we find no Americans as yet - they are

Englishmen or French’.
These sexual trade routes may reflect regional variations in the
acceptability of homosexual behaviour, and they certainly reflect
all

[?]

Strangers
the international nature of gay culture.
in

Wlien a French dictionary

1870 illustrated the word 'pe'de'raste' with the phrase, ‘There are

many pederasts among the Greeks and Italians’, it should have
pointed out that many of these ‘pederasts’ were French. But these
geographical theories have no value whatsoever as explanations of
sexual preference.

Most ideas about homosexuality survive, often for centuries, not
because

they match

real

interesting tale. This

is

experience,

but because

they

tell

an

partly why, in the early days of sexology,

literature and science were so mutually dependent. From about 1870

to 1920, scientific studies of lesbianism increased in exactly the same
ratio as novels with lesbian characters. The theories of homosexuals

themselves tended to be disappointingly banal. Most people who were
interviewed on the subject simply claimed that they had been ‘that

way’ for as long as they could remember.

The ‘scientific’ approach to homosexuality nearly always involves
a logical fallacy. The 1994 National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and
only obvious distinguishing feature

Lifestyles in Britain finds that the

of British homosexuals apart from sexual orientation is a tendency to
live in

London. Anecdotal and forensic evidence suggests that this
been going on for at least 200 years, and

internal migration has

probably for as long as large settlements have existed. Towns and cities
offered a more tolerant or indifferent population and a more varied
social life.

On arriving in a big city, many 19th-century homosexuals

were amazed to find that they were not unique after all. The city

might have altered their behaviour and even revealed their sexuality
to them, but few gay people thought of their sexuality as a side-effect

of urban living.

The storytelling instinct, however, presented this demographic
trend not as a reflection of practical arrangements but as dramatic

evidence that

cities

breed sexual perverts.

The bright lights and

polluted air of New York, London, Paris and Berlin were the fire and

brimstone that destroyed

Sodom and Gomorrha. This notion was

reinforced by popular expressions like ‘Sodom on the Spree’ (Berlin)

or ‘Sodom by the Sea’ (San Francisco), and titles like Sodom in Union

Square (1879) or Paris-Gomorrhe (1894). The connection between the
mythical past and the mysterious present was so firmly established

[

8]

Prejudice
that

physical

explanations

for

the

disappearance of

Sodom and

Gomorrha, by earthquake or the ignition of subterranean bitumen
lakes, were sometimes treated as arguments in favour of sexual tolerance: the Sodomites were not sinners, they were victims of a natural
catastrophe.

The habit of attaching colourful causes to banal effects is not
peculiar to popular notions of homosexuality. The same sort of
seems to have inspired the enduring psychological idea that

logic

homosexuals are produced by weak or absent fathers and overprotective mothers (first expressed scientifically in Freud’s 1910 essay

on Leonardo da Vinci). Far from identifying a cause, this appears
to describe a

common parental reaction to sons who were either

homosexual or effeminate: mothers tended to sympathize, fathers
tended to sever all ties.
Freud’s idea satisfied the two main requirements for a successful
theory. First, it chimed with popular prejudice - in this case, the belief
that gay men are ‘mummy’s boys’. Second, it was almost indestructibly
elastic. If the father

was sympathetic, he could still be described as

weak. Similarly, most mothers could be said to have exercised a degree
of emotional domination at some stage in the child’s development,
especially in the early years.

Similar theories can be found throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.

However thick the layers of subsequent elaboration, almost

every ‘scientific’ explanation of homosexuality can be traced back to
a rudimentary fact:
Fact:

Homosexuals are less likely to marry than heterosexuals.

Theory: Homosexuality is caused by celibacy.
Fact:

Homosexual acts were illegal.

Theory:
Fact:

The homosexual is a criminal type.

Many homosexuals studied by doctors had suffered blackmail,

arrest, public mockery and a humiliating medical examination.

Theory:
Fact:

Homosexuals are neurotic.

Lunatic asylums provided pathologists with large numbers of

more or less compliant experimental subjects.
Theory:

Homosexuals are insane.

[9]

Strangers
As Marc-Andre Raffalovich complained in Uranisme et unisexualite
(1896), the silent majority of ‘unisexuals’

was unknown to doctors

and legislators precisely because it was silent. By sheer force of circumstance, the typical unisexual, in the eyes of many doctors, was a
garrulous transvestite with a hectic sex-life and a history of mental
illness.

Naturally, most of these ideas seemed to come true after the fact.

Homosexuals who were treated as criminals sometimes committed
suicide,

which proved that they were mentally unstable. Some were

grateful to doctors for listening to their tales of woe and tried to live

up to their new, scientific persona. In exchange for a friendly ear,
they provided evidence of hysterical behaviour, moral weakness or a
family tree infested with lunatics and drug addicts.

The scientists themselves had ever more reason to believe their
own theories. Any doctor who had peered into a thousand anuses
looking for the physiological signs of ‘inversion’ was unlikely to conclude that his theory had led him down a cul-de-sac.

Theories, then and now, can make the gay past seem much poorer

and more dismal than

it

was.

More importantly, calls for equal

treatment based on a theory of sexuality ultimately depend on the
niceness of whoever applies the theory. Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, who

campaigned openly for legal and social acceptance of homosexuality
in the 1860s

and 1870s, believed that ‘Uranians’ were congenitally

different from the rest of the human race. Heinrich Himmler, who

caused the deaths of thousands of homosexuals in Nazi death camps,
held the apparently less sinister view that boys became homosexual

through lack of opportunity, especially in cities, where, according
to Himmler, high-rise apartments prevented them from clambering

through girls’ bedroom windows.

From a late-20th-century theoretical point of view, Himmler’s idea
would be more acceptable because it stressed the element of choice.
Ulrichs’ innateness theory, though it helped to change attitudes,
would be seen as a cringing concession to prejudice: homosexuals
should be tolerated because they can’t help it.

Prejudice

The first modern historians of homosexual love worked under
severe personal and professional constraints but

still

managed

to

supply a vast amount of reliable information without losing their
patience or their sense of humour. However, apart from one or two

high-speed aerial reconnaissance projects, most books on the subject

were confined to one country or one language and were vulnerable

One of the main ambitions of this book was
make ‘Europe’ mean something more than Britain and a variety
of continental holiday destinations, and especially to make the discoveries of European historians better known in the English-speaking
to local distortions.
to

world. Gay men and women in Europe and America were remarkably

cosmopolitan, but this

is

not always reflected in histories of the

subject.

The biggest surprise was the blanket influence of Michel Eoucault’s
theory of social construction (see p. 42), developed in his Histoire de
la sexualite

(1976-84). The great advantage of this theory was that it

allowed sexuality to be studied in the light of history and sociology.
Unfortunately, it has popularized the view that gay people have no
real heritage before the 1870s. The basic idea is that sexuality is not

innate but ‘constructed’ by a particular set of circumstances, notably

by the rise of competitive capitalism and its handmaidens, modern
science and bureaucratic control. In its extreme form, the social constructionist approach suggests that ‘homosexuality’ did not exist until

the word was invented. Before then, supposedly, sexuality was just a
certain repertoire of acts, not a personality trait.

This approach not surprisingly had

a

wide appeal beyond the

scholarly gay community: it meant that there was no continuous gay
culture and that Socrates or Michelangelo could not be seen as ‘gay’; it

seemed

to promise an automatic avoidance of anachronism,

and

enoimous influence to the theorists’ academic predecessors. It also allowed very small amounts of evidence to be presented
as insights into an entire period and culture. It is no coincidence that
the biggest theories tended to come from the smallest articles.
The theory that homosexuality came into being at a particular
moment closely matched popular notions of sexual history. Early
Christian theologians. Romantic poets and 20th-century queer theor-

it

attributed

ists all

espoused the view that, after a cataclysmic moment in human

[ii]

Strangers
history - the Fall of Man, the death of God, the modernist ‘fracturing’

of thought and knowledge - a Golden Age of sexual indeterminacy

came to an end. This ideological perception of a less guilty and
simpler sexual past is suspiciously similar to the convenient attitudes

of some Victorian colonists. In places that are foreign by time or
distance, causal links are often invisible

and their apparent absence

tends to create an impression of unusual spontaneity and freedom.

This unadministered world would have been unrecognizable to the
natives of the 19th century.
First, there

always were people who were primarily or exclusively

attracted to people of their own sex. They had no difficulty in identifying themselves as homosexual (or whichever word was used), often

from a very early age. Second, these people were known to exist
and were perceived to be
‘homosexual’ or
in

‘gay’,

different.

They did not call themselves

and they lived in

a society that

would be

many ways profoundly shocking and mostly unrecognizable to
But early Victorian ‘sodomites’,

inhabitants of the 21st century.
‘mollies’, ‘margeries’

and ‘poufs’ had a great deal in common with

the later ‘Uranians’, ‘inverts’, ‘homosexuals’ and ‘queers’: very similar
daily experiences, a shared culture, and of course an ability to fall in

love with people of their own sex.
*

No HISTORY OF a human trait can claim to be comprehensive.
‘Homosexuality’ is a huge generalization and the word itself conveys
a fearsomely clinical notion of love. It reinforces the vulgar association

of gay love with anal intercourse (also commonly practised by women

and heterosexual men). Strangely, though, the commonest objection
to the word, since its invention in 1868 (see p. 67), has been that it

combines Greek {homos, same) with Latin {sexus). (The same complaint could be made of ‘television’ and ‘sociologist’.)

A more serious problem is the lack of evidence. Some countries, like
Spain and Canada, are largely uncharted territory. In all countries,
private papers were destroyed, thoughts were never recorded, lives

were cloaked in conventionality, and a plague of euphemisms wiped
out the traces of homosexual love.
It is difficult in any case to give a fair and concise description of

Prejudice
social attitudes at any one time. The inevitable tendency is to carica-

ture a period so that it can be contrasted with another period. The

following four statements, for instance, could be used to characterize
the attitudes of a particular society to homosexuality:

- Homosexuality ‘may be tolerated by the French, but we are
British - thank God.’

- Homosexuality ‘is entirely precipitated by the abnormal sexual
behaviour of parents during pregnancy’

- God has visited a ‘dreadful plague’ on ‘perverts’ who ‘offend the
laws of God and nature’.
- Homosexuals should be hanged, flogged, castrated and ‘sent

home’.

These apparendy archaic opinions were published in Britain in
1965, 1977 and 1986. One day, they might allow 22nd-century readers
to feel sorry for people who had to suffer through the benighted end

of the 20th century. But few people alive today would consider this a
balanced description of sexual attitudes in modern Britain.

The tabloid image of a mean-spirited population of ignoramuses
consumed by fear and envy can of course be corrected by personal
experience. But when the period in question lies beyond living
memory, the distortions are harder to correct.

One of the main sources of information on homosexuality is literature. Since, at first sight, the literary

record says very little on the

subject, it looks as though homosexuality was relatively unimportant

or unusual in the past. But literature has only rarely been the free and

encyclopedic expression of a whole society. Other common aspects of

human life are also missing from the record.
In fact, the subject of homosexuality was far more prevalent than
it seems.

Words, gestures and symbols, even from one half-generation

to the next, become almost prehistorically obscure. ‘Lavender aunts’,

‘musical’

young men, crooked fingers and green carnations are no

longer widely understood as references to homosexuality. But the
evidence

is

there.

Newspapers could refer to homosexual scandals

with the faintest of allusions, and city crowds obviously knew why
they were hurling dead cats and offal at sodomites in the

pillory.

The ‘crime not to be named among Christians’ exists even in the

[13]

Strangers
supposedly genteel world of Jane Austen: ‘Certainly’, says Mary Crawford in Mansfield Park (1814), ‘my home at my uncle’s brought me

acquainted with a circle of admirals. Of Rears, and Vices, I saw enough.

Now, do not be suspecting me of a pun, I entreat.’

This book is divided into three parts. Part One describes the treatment of gay men and women by the legal and medical professions
and by society in general. Part Two describes their lives and loves -

how they discovered themselves and made contact with like-minded
people. This part ends with the dawn of homosexual solidarity and

the early gay rights movement. Part Three is devoted to some crucial
aspects of gay culture.

A social history that ranges over one and a half continents and one
and a half centuries can have nothing precise to say about the likely
future, but

it

might provide some credible reasons to take a more

cheerful view of the past.

[14]

Part One

In the Shadows

Lord Darlington:

Do you know I am afraid that good

people do a great deal of harm in this world. Certainly
the greatest harm they do is that they make badness of

such extraordinary importance.
Oscar Wilde, Lady Windermere'^s Fan, Act 1

O

NE OF THE RICHEST sourccs of information on the gay past has
to

do with the capture and punishment of homosexuals: laws,

court records and criminal statistics.

This is unfortunate for several reasons. By lumping homosexual

men and women together with insane or violent people, the criminal
evidence paints a grim and antiquated picture of the 19th century.

Like the earliest psychiatric studies of homosexuality,
people

it

places the

who were popularly and legally known as ‘sodomites’ in

the same sexual zoo as exhibitionists, paedophiles and sex-murderers.

Since the law was concerned with acts, not with desires,

it

turns

homosexual history into a long tale of sodomy and prostitution.

The fact that sodomy was punishable by death in England and
Wales until 1861 suggests that many people lived their lives in the
shadow of the gallows, and that the official and social homophobia
of the 20th century was a continuation of a Victorian trend rather
than something peculiarly modern. Bathed in the red glow of crime,
the whole Victorian age looks like a

homophobic hell from which

Strangers
gay people eventually liberated themselves. In this view, a happy gay
heritage dates back only a few decades, or, missing out the period of

supposed persecution, to

a

remote and poorly understood group

of cultures labelled ‘Ancient Greece’. All but the last generation and
a half of gay culture is reduced to a simple reaction against oppression.

The view from the courtroom also obliterates lesbians almost completely, whilst conferring a perverse

kind of prestige on homosexual

men. There have been attempts to show that lesbians also suffered
legal as well as social persecution. Sexual acts between women were

outlawed in some European countries (Prussia until 1851; Austria
until 1971; Spain, briefly, until 1976), but the laws were almost never

applied.

Most cases from the

13 th to the

18th century involved

another crime - usually deception or, in one case, the use of dildos

by two 16th-century Spanish nuns. A woman like Mary Hamilton,

who was publicly whipped and sent to prison for ‘marrying’ three
unsuspecting women - as described in Henry Fielding’s The Female
Husband (1746) - was punished, not as a female sodomite, but as

someone who had ‘by false and deceitful practices endeavoured to
impose on some of his Majesty’s subjects’.
Finally, in the vast muddle of sexual history, statistics seem to
provide fixed reference points. This has endowed them with a huge,
undeserved influence on notions of the gay or not-so-gay past. It is
all the more surprising that, until Harry Cocks’s thesis. Abominable
Crimes: Sodomy Trials in English Law and Culture^ 1830-1889 (University of Manchester, 1998), no book or article had presented more
than a few years’ worth of statistical evidence for England and Wales.

The figures that were doled out in various studies, to prove various
points, formed an amorphous puzzle that looked different, but always

bleak, whenever it was assembled.

One aim of this chapter, therefore, is to demonstrate the relative
unimportance of its

subject, to present the forensic evidence but

also to suggest that

punishment was rarely systematic and never a

vital

element of gay culture.

fact should

The following proliferation of legal

be seen as a spring-cleaning, after which the realities of

individual lives should be easier to find.
*

[i8]

In the Shadows

A COMPLETE STATISTICAL STUDY of legal persecution in Europe
and the United States would be impossibly complex and full of gaps.

Most of the following figures refer to England and Wales, for which
reliable and fairly consistent information is available. Other countries,

discussed later in this chapter, either had no laws against homosexual
acts or did not apply the laws with the seeming diligence shown by

English courts. This means that, although the conclusions are widely
applicable, much of this chapter is devoted to an unusually punitive

Erom a purely statistical point of view, a homosexual
man was better off living in Spain under the Inquisition or Russia

jurisdiction.

under the Tsars than in Victorian England.

Graph 1 (Appendix I, p. 272) shows indictments for sodomy and
related offences (assault with intent to commit sodomy, incitement
and soliciting) per 100,000 of population, from 1810 to 1900.

These figures cast immediate doubt on the presumption of systematic punishment. Eirst, there was no significant increase in indictments

of ‘sodomites’ in 19th-century England and Wales. An apparent slight
increase disappears once the rise in population is taken into account.
If anything, there

was an overall decrease from the mid- 1840s to

the end of the century, despite the fact that, after 1892, the figures

include the offence of indecency. Conviction rates also remained
quite steady: 67 per cent of prosecutions led to a conviction in the

1810s, 57 per cent in the 1890s, with an average for the whole century

of 49 per cent. These rates were not unusual and do not suggest that,
within the terms of the law, sodomites were treated with unusual
severity.

The second surprise is that the variations form no significant
pattern. None of the factors that are sometimes supposed to have
caused trends had any observable effect: changes in the law; war and
unrest; economic recession; public scandals - except where the scandal
itself inflated the figures.

When comparatively small numbers of people were involved, a
single incident, like the Vere Street scandal of 1810, could affect the
figures disproportionately.

Of the twenty-seven men rounded up at

the Vere Street ‘molly house’ near the Strand in London, six were

found guilty of attempted sodomy. This single police raid accounts
for over 1 1 per cent of all convictions for sodomy and related offences

[19]

Strangers
in 1810,

and several other convictions were probably related to the

same raid. Faced with the horrific and possibly fatal humiliation of
the pillory,

some people preferred to suffer a bad conscience and

informed on their fellows.

A similar absence of long-term trends has been found in sodomy
trials in

18th-century Amsterdam. Trials tended to come in groups.

As in the Vere Street case, one detailed confession could lead to
several arrests, but the effect was always temporary and there is no

evidence of persistent, methodical persecution. The most dramatic

purge of sodomites in Dutch history - twenty-four men and boys
strangled and burned at the stake in the village of Faan in 1731 - was
the
as

work of a single magistrate, who seems to have used sodomy

an excuse to eradicate his personal enemies. This freak incident

accounts for 4 per cent of all Dutch sodomy convictions in the 18th
century.

In earlier periods, when buggery and sodomy were treated as forms

of heresy, there was occasionally a clear correlation between religious
zeal

and the punishment of sexual deviants. But a more pragmatic,

secular view seems to have prevailed throughout continental Europe

from the mid- 17th century.

Other fluctuations in the 19th-century figures can be attributed
to passing causes like ‘social purity’ campaigns and moral crusades
against prostitution and child abuse (England in the 1860s and 1880s,

the United States in the 1880s and later) or a reconfiguration of
existing laws: a rise in what might appear to be homosexual prose-

cutions occurred in the United

States

when sodomy laws were

modified to include oral sex (heterosexual or homosexual).

Legal changes directly affecting homosexual men were also surprisingly inconsequential. In this respect, the biggest non-event on

Graph 1 is the famous Labouchere Amendment, under which Oscar
Wilde was prosecuted. This Amendment (Section XI of the Criminal
Law Amendment Act, 1885) came into force on 1 January 1886
and, supposedly for the first time, made all homosexual acts between

men illegal, ‘in public or private’. In fact, homosexual acts were
already illegal, whether or not they took place in private. If Oscar

Wilde had been convicted at any time in the previous 200 years, he
would probably have received the same sentence. Conviction rates in

[

20 ]

In the Shadows
the ten years before and after the Amendment were practically identical (55

per cent and 56 per cent), and there was no significant rise

in prosecutions until the 20th century.

Not all the faces behind these statistics belonged in any case to
what would later be called homosexuals. The term ‘sodomite’ was
widely used in much the same way as ‘pederaste’* still is in France,
to refer to men who fell in love with other men, but in legal terms,
‘sodomite’ was

a

broader category than the later ‘homosexual’.

Sodomy became a civil crime in England in 1533, but the ‘detestable
and abhomynable vice’ defined by the 1533 statute could be committed with ‘mankynde

[i.e.

man or woman] or beaste’. The sex

partner of one of the sodomites convicted in England in 1834 was a

ewe, and even that sub-category was contentious. In 1877, reviewing
the case of a Warwickshire man accused of committing an ‘unnatural

offence with a fowl’, the Attorney General decreed that a fowl is ‘not

an animal’ and granted the man a free pardon.

The term

‘unnatural’

was equally capacious. The ‘unnatural’

offence of buggery was associated at various times with oral sex

and the use of contraception (‘unnatural’ because non-procreative).
In Amsterdam, before the introduction of the French penal code in

1811, most of the eighteen prosecutions from 1800 to 1810 involved

men who tried to have sex with children. In the United States, of
eighty-nine reported sodomy cases from 1880 to 1925, only twentyfive

involved consensual

sodomy between two men. In the other
committed by a man with a woman, a

sixty-four cases, the act was

child or an animal, or was part of a violent attack.

The fact that men who had sex with other men were placed in the
same category as paedophiles, zoophiles and rapists can be interpreted
as a sign

of institutional homophobia.

On the other hand, if the

‘homosexual’ was not a recognized variety of human being, the legal
persecution of homosexuals could only be described as accidental.

Only one kind of sexual act was considered licit, and this view was
metaphysical rather than social. The buggery laws, for instance, were

not inspired by concern for animal welfare but by notions of what
constituted ‘vice’.

From pais (boy) and erastes (lover).

Strangers
There was little change in this respect throughout the 19th century.
Medical and criminological approaches to sexual deviance simply
(but with endless scholarly complications) redefined ‘vice’ in their

own professional terms. If one particular classification system had
prevailed, homosexuals might have been legally separated from thugs

and lunatics and treated differently; but this did not occur until much
later.
*

Some more plausible attempts have been made to detect patterns
of persecution. According to one of the most popular arguments,
prosecutions of homosexuals increased in times of war or civil unrest.

Evidence of a surge of anti-sodomitical activity in wartime was first
presented in 1976 and 1978 in studies of British naval court-martials.

The theory was later extended, without evidence, to the civilian
population.

The idea that social turmoil creates waves of homophobia looks
plausible because

of the widespread belief that homosexuals are

effeminate and that a nation with a large homosexual population is

an easy prey for a virile foe. This notion was used at various times
to explain the

fall

of Rome, the capture of Constantinople by the

Crusaders, and the defeat of the decadent French Second Empire
by Prussia in 1870. More recently, it was used in Britain and the

United States to oppose the admission of gay men and women to
the armed forces.
It turns out,

however, that the spate of buggery cases in the Royal

Navy during the Seven Years’ War and the Napoleonic wars (nine
death sentences for sodomy from 1797 to 1805) coincides exactly
with a sudden huge increase in the size of the Navy. War brought

mass conscription. The argument that there was an ideological purge
of buggers

is

not fundamentally implausible, but

it

should take

account of the fact that there were more sailors to prosecute. Even
then, buggery accounted for only 5 per cent of all capital convictions

from 1756 to 1806 (19 out of 371 - the remainder comprising murderers, mutineers, deserters and men who had struck an officer).
There is, at first sight, more convincing evidence of a campaign
of persecution in the fact that the death penalty was also applied to

[

22 ]

In the Shadows
civilian sodomites in England, and Wales until 1835.

Even if, as was

often the case, the executed man had also committed rape or murder,
it

seems likely that the mere suspicion of sodomy could provoke an

unusually savage response.

The last execution of a sodomite in Erance took place in 1783,
when a defrocked monk was burned at the stake for murdering a boy
who refused to have sex with him. The last execution for sodomy
anywhere in continental Europe took place in Holland in 1803; but
in England, executions continued until 1835. Eorty-six people were

executed for sodomy between 1810 and 1835. A further thirty- two

were sentenced to death but reprieved. The remaining 713 who were
convicted of sodomy or a related offence received a milder sentence

- pillory (until 1816) or imprisonment. Of the 1,596 prosecutions
between 1810 and 1835, 805 ended in acquittal.
However, Graph 2 (Appendix I, p. 272) shows that even this apparently definitive statistic should be treated with caution. Although the

death penalty for sodomy was not abolished in England and Wales
until 1861 (1889 in Scotland), the change in the law was anticipated

by a quarter of a century. No sodomites were executed after 1835.
This unofficial abolition of the death penalty coincided with an
increase in the number of death sentences, as if judges and juries now
felt free to issue their grisly warnings.

Harsh laws, in other words, may foster leniency, and vice versa. If
the sentence is death and if juries suspect that the guilty man will
die,

they may be fussier about the evidence and more reluctant to

convict.
It is,

to say the least, a statistical error to view these forty-six

executions as evidence of ‘genocide’. Some ancient laws, which survived like hideous living fossils, have been used to paint a picture of
continual, savage persecution. But there is no evidence that sodomites

were ever buried alive (as prescribed by a 13th-century English law).

Nor did sodomitical women in the United States ever have half-inch
holes cut through the cartilage of their noses (as recommended by

Thomas Jefferson and others when revising the laws of Virginia in
1777). The mere existence of a law says even less about the character
of a society than a statement of moral principles does about the

behaviour of an individual.

Strangers

Sodomy was undoubtedly a special case. It remained a capital
offence in England and Wales long after the death penalty had been

abolished for crimes such as house-breaking, horse-stealing and sacrilege.

This may reflect deliberate repression, or simply a reluctance

by legislators to debate the matter in public. When politicians or
journalists

were asked to come up with an opinion, they generally

expressed horror at the ‘unmentionable’ crime. In private,

many

thought it inhumane or pointless to punish a crime that had no victim
(see

Chapter 7). The death penalty was after all abolished. A bill of

1841 passed the House of Commons but was rejected by the House
of Lords. The 1861 bill passed both Houses. The new sentence - ten
years to

life

- could hardly be described as permissive, but it did

show a willingness to modernize and humanize the law, even in such
a controversial case.

The underlying problem is that the very process of singling out
prosecutions of homosexuals suggests that homosexuals were singled

out for special treatment. For most of the 19th century, in sexual
matters, women had more to fear from the law than homosexual men.

Under the English Divorce Act of 1857, a wife who committed a
small, private, heterosexual indiscretion could be divorced and effectively condemned to social death.

grounds for divorce, unless

it

A husband’s adultery was insufficient

involved sodomy. In France, public

indecency and corruption of the young - often applied to sodomites

maximum prison sentence of six months. Adultery applied almost exclusively to women - carried a maximum sentence

- carried

a

of two years.

The separation of homosexual crimes from the other statistics
also

makes an anachronistic perception of the punishment almost

inevitable. It may not seem that much leniency was being shown to

men who were clamped in pillories and exposed for several hours to a
self-righteous mob of sadists armed with barrowfuls of excrement and
dead animals. But these public displays of self-righteous cruelty were
not reserved for sodomites, and there is no real evidence that juries

were unusually vindictive. The pillory was the lightest sentence available. In early- 1 9th-century England, a person could be hanged even
for

minor theft. (The pillory was abolished in 1816 for all crimes

except subornation and perjury, and abolished completely in 1837.)

[24]

In the Shadows

The more dramatic the punishment, the greater the opportunities
for misrepresentation. It has

been pointed out that, in 1806, there

were more executions for sodomy than for murder, and that, in 1810,
four out of five convicted sodomists were hanged, but these facts are

extremely misleading when viewed in isolation.

Graph 3 (Appendix I, p. 273) shows that, while sodomy remained
a capital offence, executions for sodomy were a small

percentage of

total executions.

Sodomy - usually with violence - accounted for less than 3 per
cent of all executions in England and Wales from 1805 to 1835.

Murder accounted for 21 per cent. By far the largest number of
executions were for crimes against property,

many of which would

now seem too trivial even for imprisonment.
Until the mid-20th century, this seems to have been the case

wherever sodomites were prosecuted. In the United States, according to William Eskridge, ‘sodomy arrests remained a tiny portion
(a fraction

of one percent) of total arrests in all cities’ from 1900

to 1920. In British India, there

were only seven prosecutions and

three convictions until 1929 under the 1860 law prohibiting ‘carnal
intercourse against the order of nature’. Most of these cases involved
assaults on children.

However

iniquitous

the spirit of the law,

conviction rates in

England and Wales suggest that trials for sodomy were just as fair
(or unfair) as trials for other offences. Once arrested, a sodomite was
just as likely as

any other criminal to be acquitted, and he could

expect the sentence to reflect a proven fact rather than mere prejudice

or rumour. After 1781, to convict a man of buggery, it was necessary
to prove both penetration and emission of semen, and although the
latter criterion was removed in 1828, the change was inspired, not by

a desire to persecute sodomites, but

by a concern that rapists were

escaping too easily.

The lack of detailed court reports may suggest that sodomites were
convicted on flimsy or non-existent evidence. Newspaper reports

were sketchy and euphemistic and left their readers to imagine the
unimaginable. Typically, The Morning Chronicle of London reported

on 6 April 1815 that ‘a hoary miscreant, a workhouse pauper [was
executed for] a crime at which nature shudders, not a syllable of the

[25]

Strangers
evidence on which we can state’. Clearly, then, evidence had been
given.

But reporters were often instructed by judges to omit the

loathsome details, either for the sake of decency or to guard against
the possibility that readers might try out the unspeakable acts for

themselves and cause an epidemic of unnatural vice.

Throughout the 19th century, silence was by far the commonest
tactic, not just in Britain. The usual view was expressed by Napoleon,
when confronted with evidence of a thriving sodomite community in

Chartres in 1805: ‘Nature has seen to it that [these offences] are not
frequent. The scandal of legal proceedings would only tend to multiply them.’ In a

modern democracy, the bureaucratic concealment

of official punishments would look like an attempt to disguise repression. In the 19th century it was founded on concern for public welfare.

Sodomy was widely believed to be a vice that thrived on publicity.
The court reports that have survived suggest that the evidence
heard in English courts was sufficiently explicit. The following testimony comes from the unpublished record of a sodomy trial held on
26 June 1807:
Pearce unbutt’d my Breeches & put up my Shirt I asked him wt he

was going to do he said I was to be quiet and lie still I told him
he ought to be quiet & lie still because I wanted to go to sleep he took
his

Yard and put [it] to my Fundament. I told him it was worth his

Life to do any such thing.

[.

.

.]

he did not say a word but proceeded

on he went to put his Yard into my Fundament it went in a little way
not far.
Official discretion sometimes prevented cases from coming to trial
at all.

Sodomites, especially those in high places, were often allowed

to leave the country.

When the Cleveland Street affair of 1890

revealed the sordid secrets of male brothels and the part-time activities

of London telegraph boys, the Government seemed curiously

slow to prosecute. This has given rise to a feeble conspiracy theory

concerning Queen Victoria’s homosexual grandson. Prince Eddy.
It is

more likely, as Harry Cocks suggests, that the Government was

simply trying to cover up its usual reluctance to advertise the activities
of sodomites. In this case, its hand was forced by campaigning journal-

[26]

In the Shadows

ists

and by an enthusiastic police constable who clearly enjoyed the
^

investigation.

A clergyman called Veck and a clerk called Newlove received prison
sentences of four and nine months, but the most prominent culprit,

Lord Arthur Somerset, was

able to flee to the South of France

where he spent the remaining thirty-seven years of his life with a
male companion.

Beyond Britain,

generalizations

about

legal

persecution

are

unavoidably speculative, either because sodomy laws were inconsistent or unevenly applied, or because there was no specifically anti-

homosexual legislation. In France, the revolutionary Code Penal of
1791 decriminalized sexual relations between

men by deliberately

omitting any reference to them. This reform was incorporated into
the Code Civil of 1804 and subsequently imposed, adopted or imi-

Holland and many of the German

tated,

at least for a time,

states.

Before the end of the 19th century, homosexual acts between

in

consenting adults were no longer prohibited in Belgium,

Italy,

Luxembourg, Monaco, Portugal, Romania and Spain (depending on
the interpretation oi abusos deshonestos^ in the 1822 legal code). Brazil
‘

removed sodomy from its criminal code in 1830. In the United States,
where the 1533 English statute was adopted, but without the death
penalty, convictions were rare until the 1880s.
This is not to say that a homosexual Englishman had only to cross
the Channel to find peace and happiness. The mere absence of antisodomitical laws did not bring immunity from harassment and
prosecution. Erance, with its revolutionary code, is sometimes mentioned as an example of modern tolerance, but ‘pederasts’ could still

be punished under laws on public indecency, corruption of the young

and even vagrancy. The notorious ‘lewd-vag’ (public lewdness and
vagrancy) arrests of 1950s California were not a new idea.

This supple use of legislation makes it hard to discover the true
extent of official persecution.

When Paul Verlaine was arrested in

Brussels in 1873 for shooting his lover Arthur Rimbaud in the wrist,

he received the maximum sentence of two years. A medical examination had revealed ‘traces of habitual pederasty, both active and

[27]

Strangers
passive’,

and although Verlaine’s sexuality was strictly irrelevant, it

seems to have influenced the jury.
Despite the legal tolerance of homosexuality, France was more

dangerous for homosexuals than England. For most of the 19th
century, raids on homosexual clubs and cruising-grounds were even

more common in Paris than they were in London. In the
official

1850s,

campaigns were launched to ‘clean up’ the streets or (as one

police doctor put it) to take soundings in the sea of ‘filth’.
ticularly energetic series of raids in

A par-

1865 caused a small diaspora of

about 10 per cent of whom were foreigners. In Paris

‘pederasts’,

alone, from 1860 to 1870, 1,282 pederasts were prosecuted.

A further

By contrast, in all of England
and Wales, there were 1,210 indictments for sodomy and related
1,631 were caught in flagrante delicto.

offences in the same period.

These extraordinary

efforts

certainly reflect a degree of insti-

tutional prejudice. Francois Carlier, who ran the Paris vice squad in

the 1860s, thought that ‘pederasty’ deprived the sufferer of courage,

family feeling and patriotism. ‘Normal’ prostitutes, who were registered by municipal doctors, performed a useful function, in his view,

by sating the

lusts

of potential

rapists,

whereas pederasts were

inherently useless and should not be tolerated.

Prejudice against ‘pederasts’, however,
explanation.

is

by no means the only

Mass round-ups were standard

police procedure for

dealing with prostitution (approximately 12,000 female prostitutes

were arrested each year), and French policemen seem to have found
distinguish between male prostitutes and their
it impossible to
customers.

Many of the men arrested were caught having sexual

intercourse in surprisingly public places like the shrub-lined avenues

of the Champs-Elysees. Their arrest for indecency was not a specific
result of their sexuality. Public intercourse of any kind was liable to

punishment.
Carlier himself was mainly concerned with child prostitutes and
blackmailers, who often masqueraded as policemen, and sometimes

were policemen. The heaviest sentences were reserved for blackmail

- often forced labour for life in New Caledonia. Carlier’s colleague,
Louis Canler, head of the Surete, dealt with ‘antiphysicals’
physique ~ ‘unnatural’) and blackmailers in the

[28]

{anti-

same chapter of his

In the Shadows

memoirs. Like most writers on the subject, he considered blackmailers
a lower life-form than antiphysicals and painted an almost approving

picture of a model homosexual couple whose lifestyle preserved them

from the wiles of blackmailers and pimps:

A wealthy foreign gentleman of seventy years, allied to one of the
great families of northern Europe, settled in a sumptuous townhouse
in Paris. [.

.

.]

He brought with him a boy of eighteen (silky moustache,

retrousse nose, feminine voice and appearance) whom he passed off as

They spent the daytime shut up in the apartment.
The young man, dressed as a woman, would devote himself to needlehis

nephew.

[.

.

.]

work, either embroidery or tapestry. At dinner time, the ‘nephew’

would put on male clothing again and, after dinner, the two inseparables would climb into their carriage and go to the cafe for a cup of

coffee and to read the newspapers. At ten o’clock, they climbed back
into the carriage and returned home.

Of course, the fact that their daily routine was known to the police
shows that they were not exactly free. But they were unlikely to be
arrested. Many prosecutions in France were the result, not of direct

police action, but of specific complaints: from members of the public

who heard unseemly noises coming from public urinals, or from other
homosexuals who used the law as a convenient means of revenge.
The files of the Prefecture de Police show that many lovers’ quarrels
ended with an anonymous letter to the vice squad.

There was also some concern about false arrests and weak evidence.
In 1881, after complaints about the dubious
pianist, Louis-Marcel Voyer,

trial

of a well-known

only ten arrests were made in Paris for

‘male prostitution’, compared to 165 in 1879 and 120 in 1880. (In
1882, normal service was resumed: eighty- two arrests.)

The main lesson of the French evidence is, first, that many
law-enforcers who came into contact with real homosexual men,
rather than with a shadowy, abstract notion of ‘pederasty’, quickly

changed their minds and developed an anthropological fascination
with these strange creatures who

own sex. Second,

fell

in love with people of their

by police campaigns
against prostitutes and blackmailers, there was - to anticipate the
second part of this book - a thriving homosexual community with a
despite the threat posed

[29]

Strangers
highly politicized sense of its sexual rights, a calendar of events and
anniversaries,

its

own villains and living legends, social clubs with

international links, cafes and brothels, and well-established cruising-

grounds with organized patrols.

Something similar could be said of most major cities, whatever
the laws and however active the police.

Some form of homosexual

community seems to have existed in any city large enough to provide
anonymity. In most European and American cities, there was a place
or even a district where homosexual men - and, more rarely, women
- could meet in relative safety (see Chapter 6): the waterfront in San
Francisco, Broadway and Central Park in New York, parks, alleyways
and toilets in Toronto (from about 1 890), Montmartre in Paris, Unter
den Linden in Berlin, the Retiro in Madrid, the docks in Barcelona,
the Boulevard Ring in Moscow, the square in front of Copenhagen

town hall, about seventeen different places in Amsterdam, and almost
everywhere in Naples.

Even in countries where new laws were enacted against sodomy
- Russia in 1835, the German Empire in 1871 - there were few
prosecutions. The notorious paragraph 175 of the German Imperial

Code (1871, from a Prussian law of 1851) made ‘unnatural vice committed by two persons of the male sex or by people with animals’ an

imprisonable offence. Lists of homosexuals were drawn up by the
sinister-sounding ‘Paderasten Abteilung’

(‘Pederasty Division’)

of

the German police, but the ‘Rosa Listen’ (‘Pink Lists’) were almost

never used and were intended in any case to serve as a weapon in
the fight against blackmailers.

von Meerscheidt-Hiillessem

The Head of the Division, Leopold

(d.

1900),

working closely with the

enlightened psychologist Albert Moll, came to the conclusion that

homosexuality was not a vice, and even tried to bequeath the Pink
Lists to the organization that campaigned for homosexual equality.

The overall picture, then, is not unremittingly bleak. Nineteenthcentury homosexuals lived under a cloud, but it seldom rained. Most
of them suffered, not from the cruel machinery of justice, but from
the creeping sense of shame, the fear of losing friends, family and
reputation, the painful incompatibility of religious belief and sexual
desire, the social and mental isolation, and the strain of concealment.

Loveless marriages caused more lasting grief than laws, and still do.

[30]

In the Shadows

Even so, as doctors and policemen discovered to their amazement,
many ‘pederasts’ were perfectly happy with their strange condition
and had no desire to change. Some of them had fulfilling, long-term
relationships. Others relished the thrills of a night of ‘public outrage’

on the Champs-Elysees. Most of them never tangled with the law. As
the head of the Paris vice squad observed, there was nothing he could

do about ‘orgies in private homes’.

As FAR AS LAW ENFORCEMENT is concemed, it was in the 20th
century that the Dark Ages began.
Unlike Graph 1 (1810-1900), Graph 4 (1900-2000) (Appendix I,
p. 274) shows a clearly significant change. (Both graphs take account
of population growth.) The huge increase in ‘buggery’ (formerly,
‘sodomy’) offences in 20th-century England and Wales (buggery,
indecent assault on males and gross indecency between males)
partly reflects the increase in all crimes of violence, but the annual
rate of increase for buggery and related offences was

much higher.

As the century progressed, buggery loomed ever larger in the eye
of the law. In the late 1890s,

it

accounted for

5

per cent of all

Crimes Against the Person. In the late 1950s, the percentage had
risen to 21.

Seen as a percentage of all recorded crimes (Graph 5, Appendix I,
p. 274),

the mid-century peak is even more dramatic: 0.24 per cent

(The figures
for homicide in the same years are 0.3 per cent, 0.06 per cent and

in 1905; 1.52 per cent in 1955; 0.09 per cent in 1995.

0.01 per cent.)

The key fact here is the contrast with the 19th century. The crime
figures do not support very detailed arguments, especially over such
a long period. Prosecutions for buggery increasingly involved children

and probably reflect a growing awareness of child abuse and greater
willingness to report it. (The offence of ‘gross indecency with a child’

was introduced in 1983.) But the specific offence of ‘gross indecency
between males’ meant homosexual acts, usually between consenting
males over the age of twenty-one. Eigures for this offence, which did
not include all consensual homosexual acts, follow the same upward
trend.

Strangers
For

all

nothing

the apocalyptic pronouncements of Victorian moralists,

like

this

had been seen before. In 1955, 2,322 cases of

indecency between males were recorded. Applying a common average
for the homosexual population of 4 per cent, and assuming that
each offence involved two people (and no reoffenders), this would

mean that one in every 125 homosexual men in England and Wales
became a criminal statistic in 1955. Nineteenth-century homosexuals
were comparatively unmolested. It was not until the 1930s that, as
Quentin Crisp put it, the police began to think of homosexuals

North American Indians thought of bison [and] cast about for a
way of exterminating them in herds’.
‘as

Allowing for incomplete figures and complex variations in State
legislation,

a

similarly dramatic rise can

be seen in man)/ other

European countries and in the United States (Graph 6, Appendix I,
p. 275).

By the mid-20th century, the earlier effects of the Enlightenment
on law reform had either evaporated or were visible only in the
form of massive state interference. France had no explicitly antihomosexual law until 1942, when the Petain regime made homosexual
acts with men under the age of twenty-one an imprisonable offence.
This law was retained after the Liberation. Prosecutions of homosexuals very soon outnumbered all previous sodomy prosecutions in
France (approximately seventy, from the 14th century to the Code
Penal of 1791). In 1960, the penalties for homosexual indecency were
increased (six months to three years in prison, and a fine of 1,000 to

15,000 francs). Homosexuality was defined as a ‘social scourge’, along

with alcoholism, prostitution and tuberculosis. The ‘Brigade Mondaine’ of the Paris police force ran a special archive on drug dealers,

drug addicts, pimps, prostitutes and ‘real or “fake” homosexuals’ (i.e.
hookers and blackmailers). The law was finally repealed in 1982.
In Germany, paragraph 175, which had narrowly escaped repeal,

was reinforced instead in 1908. The Nazis introduced a more stringent version in 1935, outlawing any ‘criminally indecent activities

between men’. A kiss or a squeeze of the hand could send a man to
jail. Like the French law, the Nazi law survived the Second World
War. Some of the few surviving homosexuals (and gypsies) who
had been incarcerated and tortured by the Nazis were transferred

[32]

In the Shadows

when the camps were liberated. In West Germany, the
maximum penalty was increased in 1957 from five to ten years. The
law was abolished in East Germany in 1968 but lived on in West
to prison

Germany, in a milder form, until 1994. Holland introduced a similar
law in 1911. It remained in force until 1971.

The Soviet Union lagged behind Europe, so to speak, by legalizing
sodomy between consenting adults in 1922. Even before the Revolution, there had been calls to repeal the sodomy law - notably by
Vladimir Nabokov, the

novelist’s father.

But in 1934, homosexual

intercourse was pronounced a decadent ‘social crime’, along with

sabotage and spying. It was not decriminalized until 1993.

Despite enormous changes since the 1960s, the legal effects of this

counter-Enlightenment are still apparent today.*
Because of its uninterrupted history of anti-sodomy legislation,

England provides the clearest evidence of a high tide of homophobia.

The purge
England

v/as

of publicly active homosexuals in mid-20th-century
surely one of the

operations of all time.

most successful and

fiatile

police

A policeman once complained to my father,

who was a probation officer in Manchester in the early 1950s, that
his tobacco always stank of chlorine because he had to spend so much
time in public toilets. In the 19th century, a ‘snowball’ effect had

sometimes produced little flurries of trials and scandals. Now, the
snowball was vast and apparently unstoppable. Moralizing legislators
could point to the statistics and warn of an alarming proliferation of
perverts, and when cases came to court, there was a new willingness

to prosecute. In 1920, the dangerously vague ‘attempt to

*

In fifteen European nations

- Albania, Armenia,

Austria,

Belarus,

commit

Bulgaria,

Cyprus, the Faeroe Islands (Denmark), Georgia, Hungary, Ireland, Lithuania,

Moldova, Portugal, Romania and Serbia - and some British outposts - Gibraltar,
Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man - the law in 2002 still distinguished between
homosexual and heterosexual acts, usually in the age of consent. In the United
Kingdom (but not Northern Ireland), the age of consent for homosexuals and
heterosexuals was equalized in January 2001, but until 2003 the notion of ‘abuse of
trust’ allowed some men who had consensual sex with boys between sixteen and
eighteen to be placed on the Sex Offenders Register. Homosexual age-of-consent
offenders are treated far more harshly than heterosexual offenders. Consensual
sodomy is outlawed in thirteen American states. The ban applies only to homosexual sodomy in Kansas, Missouri, Oklahoma and Texas.

Strangers
buggery’ (later, ‘indecent assault on males’) took over from buggery

and indecency between males as the commonest of the three homosexual offences.

The modern figures show, once again, that legislation is a poor
guide to reality. The punitive Labouchere Amendment of 1886 had

not produced a rise in prosecutions. But the progressive 1967 Act,
which legalized homosexual acts in private between two consenting

men of twenty-one and over (except in the armed services and the
merchant navy) was followed by a surge of cases of ‘indecency between
males’. The prosecution rate was 3 1 per cent in 1967 but 60 per cent
in 1971.

These figures began to fall only recently: 1,159 recorded

cases in 1990; 167 in 2000.

Roy Walmsley of the Home Office suggests that this unexpected
increase was caused by the introduction of summary

trial

for the

offence of indecency between males. Indecent men could be dealt
with, like drunkards, in less than a day. But obviously someone had
to arrest them in the first place. Old police habits died hard.
It

may seem flippant or callous to play down the perils of homo-

sexual life in the Victorian age by contrasting it with the 20th century.

The point is that the criminal statistics distort and darken the lives
of real people. Graphs are a poor guide to the daily experience of
individuals.

Even the apparently grim state of affairs that prevailed

for most of the 20th century is not final evidence of a homosexual
hell on earth. Not everyone lived the sort of life that put them within

the chlorinated grasp of policemen.

And not everyone knew - or

cared - that their sexual activities were punishable by law.
Police raids and famous

trials,

as parts

of this book will show,

could even have an encouraging effect. They proved that like-minded

people existed and that not all ‘sodomites’ lived in fearful isolation.

Legal-medical textbooks and newspaper reports were the unwitting

media of a virtual community, a society of strangers that was informed
of its own existence by its persecutors. Even a horrific case like the

Vere Street scandal of 1810 could be a consolation and a rallying-cry.
It was in this positive spirit that Byron’s friend

Charles Matthews

kept His Lordship up to date with all the latest sodomite news from

England:

[34]

In the Shadows
Your Lordship’s delicacy w^! I know be shocked by the pillorification
(in the

Hay M.) of a club of gents who were wont to meet in Vere

Street (St Clement’s) - how all London was in an uproar on that day,

how the said gents were bemired and beordured.

[.

.

.]

&

Every Newsp

that one casts one’s eye upon, presents one with some instance.

With your

friends

the

Turcomans

to

be

sure,

[sodomy’s]

value

(compared with fornication) is as five to two. But that w^^ you get for
£5 we must risque our necks for; and are content to risque them.
*

The relatively cheerful display of bleak statistics in this chapter
is

an attempt to reduce the weight of the statute books in notions

of the gay past. The once common view of the Victorian age as a
hellishly inconvenient century populated by dangerous eccentrics and

downtrodden victims has affected homosexual history even more than
other fields of social history. Information is scarce, and so the criminal

evidence plays an important role, but it should not be allowed to

dominate every scene.

Even in the tidy world of statistics, significant trends are hard to
detect. A history of homosexuality in the 19th century would be much
easier to write if epoch-making moments did rise up like volcanic
peaks in the ocean of fact, but, as the figures suggest, few such

moments exist. When the whole century is taken into account - and
not just the oscillations of a few years - the grand narratives disappear.

The same thing occurs when any particular case is examined, even
if it appears to

be unusually representative.

The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the most famous and
supposedly emblematic case of all.

On 18 February 1895, the paranoid Marquis of Queensberry,
whose son Lord Alfred Douglas was Oscar Wilde’s lover, set a
‘booby-trap’ (WTde’s expression) by leaving a card at the Albemarle
Club ‘For Oscar Wilde, posing somdomite’ {sic). Unwisely, Wilde
decided to sue for criminal libel.

During the trial, evidence of ‘unnatural habits, tastes and practices’
was discovered in Wilde’s writings - The Picture of Dorian Gray and

[35]

Strangers
some flowery letters to Alfred Douglas with his ‘red, rose-leaf lips’.

The homosexual undercurrent of the Aesthetic Movement was cruelly
exposed. The exquisite Wilde was seen to have consorted with pimps
and rent-boys. His flippant remarks show that he was either bent on
self-destruction or too flattered

by the court’s appreciative laughter

to notice the danger.

Edward Carson (pfvsecuting): Did you ever kiss [Walter Grainger]?
Oscar Wilde: Oh, no, never in my life; he was a peculiarly plain boy.
Carson:

He was what?

Wilde:

I said I thought

him unfortunately - his appearance was so very

unfortunately - very ugly - I mean - I pitied him for it.

Not surprisingly, Wilde lost the case. Legally, he was now a sitting
duck. Queensberry’s solicitor sent the trial notes and testimonies to
the Director of Public Prosecutions. Several people urged

Wilde

to take the boat-train to the Continent, but he stayed on in London.

Later that day (5 April 1895), he was arrested at the Cadogan Hotel

and charged with indecency. The jury failed to reach a verdict. He

was released on bail but still refused to leave England. At the second
trial,

he was found guilty and sentenced to two years’ hard labour.

This sad and avoidable sequence of events is still the biggest single
influence

on

perceptions

repercussions, the

Wilde

of Victorian
trials

homosexuality.

In

their

belong more to the 20th century

than to the 19th. They not only helped to impose a music-hall view
of homosexuality

as the preserve

of camping aesthetes and seedy

sex-workers, they also provided modern homosexuality with a date of
birth, a charismatic martyr and some memorable legends. According

to the famously unreliable

Frank Harris, for instance, the arrest of

Oscar Wilde was followed by a mass emigration of homosexuals to
the Continent: trains to the coast and the cross-Channel ferries were

crammed with wealthy

sodomites,

fleeing

to

France and

Italy.

‘Never was Paris so crowded with members of the English governing
classes.’ This

melodramatic fantasy has little more basis in fact than

the medieval legend according to which all sodomites died on the day
that Christ was born. Both show a tendency to treat all homosexuals as
a neurotic, undifferentiated mass, prone to catastrophe and essentially

separate from the rest of humanity.

[36]

In the Shadows
Historically, the trials of Oscar Wilde, like the Amendment under

which he was prosecuted, are a huge distraction. Homosexuality was
only part of the story. The charge was indecency, not sodomy, for

which Wilde could have received a life sentence instead of two years.
In purely legal terms, as Wilde himself acknowledged, the conviction

was fair, and public opinion was by no means unanimously hostile.

The comments of bigots like the Daily Telegraph reporter, who blamed
him for all modern sins - atheism. Impressionism, disrespect for
parents, and so on - are simply more memorable and quotable than
the sensible or humane comments.
Even after the shocking revelations of a homosexual underworld,
there was widespread support for Wilde.

paid half of his

bail;

An Anglican clergyman

the other half was paid by the Marquis of

Queensberry’s eldest surviving son. A Jewish businessman offered him
the free use of his yacht as a means of escape. The servants of his
friends the Leversons expressed

sympathy with ‘poor Mr Wilde’.

The painter Louise Jopling exchanged a ‘sorrowful’ glance with the
newsboy who told her of the verdict. W. B. Yeats, whose father urged
him to testify for Wilde, brought letters of support from several
Irish writers. ‘Cultivated

advocates.’

London’, said Yeats, ‘was now full of his

When Wilde gave his moving speech on ‘the Love that

dare not speak its name’, the hissing from the public gallery was

drowned out by applause.
After the trial, there were letters to the press protesting at Wilde’s
treatment.

The popular journalist W. T.

Stead pointed out that

Wilde’s ‘unnatural’ propensities were not unnatural for him, and
that if he had committed adultery with his friend’s wife or corrupted

young girls instead of boys, ‘no one could have laid a finger upon
him’. Even The Illustrated Police Budget was sorry that ‘one of the most
brilliant wits, epicures, and epigrammatists we have seen in England
for years’ had ‘passed from the light of freedom’.
Wilde may have been ‘crucified’ on the cross of public morality,
but he supplied the hammer and the nails. Before and after his arrest,

he was given every chance to leave the country but ignored the advice
of friends and lawyers. In court, he improvised brilliantly, but he also
lied stupidly and antagonized his prosecutors by hinting (as Solicitor-

[37]

Strangers
General Lockwood put it) that they were ‘too low to appreciate’ his
art.

The Wilde trials, in other words, cannot be treated as straightforward evidence of homophobia, though that certainly played a part.

As usual in such public cases, homosexuality was a symbol. Sodomy
was the sin that stood for all the others. Wilde’s sexual habits were
shocking, but so was the blatant disregard for class divisions that

seemed to go with them. Wilde had had the ‘disgraceful audacity’ to
dress up a common boy, found on the beach at Worthing, in ‘public
school colours’. His ‘associates’, said the Solicitor-General, ‘ought
to have been his equals and not these illiterate boys whom you have

heard in the witness box’.

Worse still, Wilde had made a brilliant career of poking fun at
English society and did nothing to apologize for his success. As Yeats

pointed out, ‘the rage against Wilde was also complicated by the
Britisher’s jealousy of art

and the artist’. ‘This hatred is not due to

any action of the artist or eminent man; it is merely the expression
of an individual hatred and envy, become collective because circumstances have made it so.’
Finally, Wilde was not English. His Irishness was never mentioned

in court, but

it

is

remarkable that so many of the famous British

sodomy scandals had an Irish connection: the arrest of the Bishop of
Clogher, the suicide of Castlereagh (accused of desiring ‘unnatural
union’ between Britain and Ireland), the Dublin Castle affair, the
Wilde trials and the trial of Roger Casement. Both Casement and
Wilde were Irish nationalists. The first person to be prosecuted under
the Labouchere Amendment had been a troublesome Irish MP,
Edward Samuel Wesley de Cobain, who had previously complained

about the brutality of British policemen in Ireland.

To reduce this complex muddle to a simple tale of ‘martyrdom’ (as
both Wilde and Douglas later saw it) is to amplify the effects of anti-

sodomy legislation. The melodramatic approach fashions a weapon
of sexual oppression out of a jumble of laws that were often casually
enacted, sporadically applied and aimed primarily at acts of violence.
It promotes a highly localized and pejorative view of homosexuality. It

suggests that gay people were defined entirely by their sexuality and
that they participated in ‘normal’ society only as impostors. It creates

[38]

In the Shadows
a largely invented oppressor and the possibility of a correspondingly

fictitious

‘liberation’.

Acceptance -

or,

as

it

came

to be

known,

‘tolerance’ - appears in this light as a relatively recent development

attributable to political agitation

and

legal

reform rather than to

general human characteristics like compassion or indifference.

These well-intentioned exaggerations have little to tell us about
the Victorian age. They belong, not to the maligned 19th century,

but to the more openly repressive age that began with the death of

Oscar Wilde in 1900.

[39]

3

Country of the Blind
J

Into whatever houses I enter, I will go into them for the
benefit of the sick, and will abstain from every voluntary
act of mischief

and corruption; and,

further,

from the

seduction of females or males, of freemen and slaves.
Hippocratic Oath; tr. E Adams

The psychoanalytic press regularly reproaches us with neglecting love and the erotic.

We are not trained for that and

are therefore not obliged to consider all mental phenomena

from that point of view. We had more important things
to do.
Alfred Adler, Das Pi’oblem der Homosexualitdt, 1930

A

S

FAR AS ‘sodomites’ Were concerned, the legal system was

underpinned and eventually almost replaced by the medical

system.

For centuries, physicians had been examining prisoners for traces
of sodomy. The two Belgian doctors who described Verlaine’s genitals
in

such loving detail in 1873 were practising an ancient art. Like

soothsayers inspecting entrails, they saw things that the uninitiated
would dismiss as insignificant. As Dr Brouardel, a friend and colleague
of Marcel Proust’s father, explained, ‘There is more variety in the
shape and size of the penis than there is in the face.’

[40]

Country of the Blind
Throughout the 19th century, as the medical profession gained
and prestige, medical views of homosexuality became

in confidence

increasingly specialized and ingenious. Homosexuality was one of the

undiscovered continents on which doctors could stake a claim to
originality and build a career.

Their investigations now sound ludi-

crously ill-informed or simply hostile, but they had a beneficial sideeffect.

Unprecedented amounts of information were gathered on the

of gay men and women who would otherwise have vanished

lives

altogether.

As the roll-call of ‘causes of homosexuality’ on pp. 5-6 suggests, a
history of medical approaches to homosexuality would be a slice of

the history of the whole medical profession. Practically every

new

theory and technique was applied - and still is being applied - to the
‘problem’ of homosexuality. This source of information therefore has

some of the disadvantages of the legal evidence. It imbues accounts
of homosexual life with the disinfectant smell of theory and favours

and

fee-paying

certain

groups:

patients,

and literate, liberated homosexuals, some of whom were

criminals

lunatics,

middle-class

medical practitioners themselves.
It also creates

the false impression that most homosexuals were

permanently suicidal. Desperate people were more likely to resort to
doctors, and the doctors often assumed that homosexuals could not

be happy. Since few people go through life without at least a glance
at the emergency exit, a determined interviewer could always turn up

evidence of suicidal misery.

The interviewers themselves were not necessarily t)/pical of their
profession. Medical science did after all make enormous advances in

the

1

9th century. It was rarely at its best when dealing with sexual

behaviour. Most doctors who tried to cure, comfort or castigate relied

on common prejudice and hazy notions of sexuality. They confused
the people they called ‘sodomites’ and ‘pederasts’ with rapists and

paedophiles. Few were at the cutting-edge of their science and, until
the 1890s, very few had access to any useful information.
hastiest

Even the

modern gay historian has read far more medical literature

on the subject than almost any Victorian doctor.

The real value of the medical literature lies in the patients’
own accounts. A huge amount of information about 19th-century

[41]

Strangers
homosexuality comes from these accounts. It is all the more important
to know about the circumstances in which they were produced. It is
also worth knowing that this was not an entirely one-sided relationship: the views of doctors were

determined to a large extent by the

information they received from their patients.

The muddle of medical theories should not be treated with too
much respect. To present these theories in chronological order is
to conjure up the image of a long, straight road to truth rather than

an intellectual swampland in which ancient superstitions thrived and

Some lingered on into the 21st century; others had a
delayed effect. The year on the surgery calendar was no guide to
diversified.

the advice that would be dispensed by the doctor.

Even now, Vicby

torian notions of homosexuality are being energetically applied
religious groups like

JONAH (Jews Offering New Alternatives to

Homosexuality) and psychiatrists purporting to treat ‘prehomosexual’
children.

There is one other reason why medical views deserve attention. A
dramatic suggestion made by Michel Foucault in 1976, based on a
19th-century idea,

is

now widely accepted as the historical truth.

Despite growing academic scepticism, it appears quite regularly in

newspaper articles and conversations. The idea is that, before 1870,
the exclusively homosexual person did not exist. ‘The homosexual’

supposedly was a creature invented by Victorian doctors. The earlier
‘sodomite’ had simply indulged in certain acts. The new ‘homosexual’

was a distinct personality, characterized by an ‘internal androgyny,
a hermaphrodism of the soul’. ‘The sodomite had been a sinner, the

homosexual was now a species.’*
Foucault, whose father had been

a

surgeon and

a professor

of

anatomy, proposed 1870 as the ‘date of birth’ of this new category
of human being and the Archiv fur Neurologie as the place of birth.

He was referring to a journal (actually the Archiv fur Psychiatric und
Nervenkrankheiten) edited by a Berlin asylum doctor called Carl

Westphal (see p. 55). In an article published in the Archiv in 1870,

*

‘Sinner’

abjuring

is

it).

a translation of 'relaps' (a person who has relapsed into heresy after
The standard English version mistranslates 'relaps' as ‘a temporary

aberration’.

[

4^1

Country of the Blind
Westphal defined ‘contrary sexual feeling’ as a neuropathic condition.

By opening his journal to the psychiatric study of homosexuality,
Westphal helped to create the new sub-discipline to which Foucault
himself belonged.

Foucault never intended his idea to be treated as the final word.

Like any theory, it was supposed to be tested, not ingested whole.

Unlike some of his followers, he never claimed that homosexuality
itself began in

1870 (phrases like ‘hermaphrodism of the soul’ had

been in use since the 18th century), and he certainly never said that
homosexuality waited to exist until a word was invented for it. Foucault seems not to have read Westphal’s article and his theory simply

repeated a commonplace of early French psychiatry. According to

Leon Thoinot in

1898, for instance, the god-like Westphal had

‘extracted from the chaos of inverted love a clear and precise morbid
type: congenital inversion’. ‘There was light, and the scientific phase

began, following the phase of chaos.’

This fantasy about the power of academic discourse, which effectively devalues all

gay experience before the advent of psychiatry,

has been a Trojan horse of homophobia.

It

draws attention to the

fact that our notions of sexuality are peculiar to our own society and

age, but it also implies that the medical profession impinged on the
lives

of gay men and women to such an extent that they eventually

saw themselves through the doctors’ eyes and became

their

own

oppressors. Ironically, the idea itself has had such a huge effect on
modern perceptions of the gay past that it is now its own best proof

Despite their apparent

complexity, medical views of

homo-

sexuality are remarkable for their persistent uniformity.

The basic divisions of homosexuality into the physiological and
the mental, the innate and the acquired, the persistent and the
circumstantial go back to the

dawn of medicine.

Several ancient

authors - Herodotus, Parmenides and Soranus - saw ‘the Scythians’

madness’ (high-pitched voices, transvestism and womanly pursuits) as
a disease of the mind. They also believed that it could be inherited.

Hippocrates, on the other hand, attributed the condition to physiological changes caused by excessive horse-riding. (The same view was

[43]

Strangers
expressed over 2,000 years later by Dr William Hammond of New
York who rediscovered the illness in the Pueblos of New Mexico.)

Most Victorian doctors would not have found parallels with ancient
writers insulting. Hippocrates was still being quoted in the 1850s as
a medical authority. Until the

mid- 19th century, the main authority

on ‘pederasty’ was Paolo Zacchias’s Quaestiones medico-legales (Rome,
1621-5), which was heavily indebted to Hippocrates. One of the most
influential theories of sexuality in the 19th century - in less literal

forms - was the idea humorously expounded by Aristophanes in
Plato’s Symposium in the 4th century bc.*

The physiological school remained dominant for most of the 19th
century, partly because most treatises on the subject were written by

doctors whose job was to provide courts with evidence of sodomy.

Even when psychiatry shifted attention from the genitals to the brain,
physiology was still thought to play a part. In the early 20th century,

Sigmund Freud and the English sexologist Havelock Ellis were still
inclined to believe that ‘inversion’ might be related to primitive hermaphrodism.

Some doctors simply registered the signs of ‘unnatural’ intercourse
such as anal infections and relaxed sphincters. Others thought that
genital anomalies

might precede the immoral acts and that physio-

logical deformity could

produce aberrant sexual behaviour. In most

cases, a simple kind of logic prevailed. It was widely assumed that a

man who felt sexual desire for another man must be in some way
female and that the signs of his femininity could be detected. By the

same token, lesbians were thought to have over-developed clitorises
which they used like penises. This childish notion survived a complete
lack of evidence (a study of Parisian prostitutes in 1836 discovered

no significant abnormalities) and could still be found in a medical
dictionary of 1849, a marriage manual of 1862, a French dictionary
of 1874 and the Larousse encyclopedia in 1876. Even in 1897,
Havelock Ellis thought it necessary to refute the idea, though he did
*

The three original sexes - male, female and hermaphrodite, each with four hands,

four legs and two faces - were cut in half by Zeus. Since then, every human has
tried to find its original ‘other half’:

men who come from hermaphrodites are

attracted to women (and vice versa), women who came from the female love women,

and men who came from the male love men.

[44]

Country of the Blind
accept the findings of a German voice specialist who discerned ‘a very

decidedly masculine type of larynx’ in ‘23 inverted women’.

Thinking on the subject was, to say the least, confused, and perhaps
further muddled by a few genuine cases of pseudo-hermaphrodism
(genital

deformation). In his Rapports du physique

et

du moral de

rhomme (1802), which contains one of the earliest modern medical
showed a typically

descriptions of homosexuality, Georges Cabanis

non-committal approach to the question of physical causes:
I have encountered some of these ambivalent individuals

who not only

had shriller voices, weaker muscles and softer, more flaccid flesh, but
also that greater proportional width of the pelvis which, as

we have

said, characterizes the bone structure of the female body; and conse-

quently they walked like women, describing a greater arc around the
centre of gravity. In such cases, the physical condition always seemed
to me to be accompanied by an exacdy matching mental condition.

The association of physiology and mental state appealed to a
sense of completeness. Medical theorists, like novelists, were in the
business of piecing together miscellaneous bits of information to
create a convincing whole.

and physical

traits

The same hotchpotch of moral, mental

underlies Balzac’s luscious

description of the

young poet Lucien de Rubempre in the first part of Illusions perdues
(1836-7):

His face had the distinguished lines of classical beauty: a Grecian brow
and nose, the soft whiteness of a woman’s skin [.

.

.]

The smile of sad

angels hovered over lips whose coral hues were heightened by beautiful
teeth. He had the hands of a well-born person, elegant hands which
women longed to kiss and whose every gesture men felt compelled to
obey
Looking at his feet, any man would have been tempted
to take him for a girl in disguise, especially since, like most men with
[.

.

.]

subtle, not to say cunning minds, his hips were shaped like those of a

woman. This is nearly always a reliable clue to character and was so
in Lucien’s case.

Balzac was accused of encroaching on medical territory, which

shows that homosexuality was felt to be a medical subject long before
psychiatry laid claim to it. In fact, Balzac was so far ahead of his time
that he is barely recognizable as a pioneer. His homosexual characters

[45]

Strangers
are not ‘sodomites’. They fall in love like other people, but with a

heroic intensity that reflects the forbidden nature of their passion.

Many doctors noticed the extraordinary degree of sexual excitement
enjoyed by ‘pederasts’ and ‘sapphists’, but only Balzac recognized this
as an effect of repression rather than as a sign of depravity.

In the ‘construction’ of homosexuality, entertaining novels like

Maupin were
surely far more influential than obscure, turgid texts written by
academic doctors. Over a century later, Kenneth Walker’s The Physiology of Sex (1940) showed that the tortoise of medical science was
Balzac’s Illusions perdues or Gautier’s Mademoiselle de

not merely slow, it feigned forward motion:

The distinctive characteristics of the more obvious types of invert are
well known. Their skins are delicate and feminine, they have deposits

of fat over their buttocks and thighs, they often talk in high-pitched
voices and their mode of walking resembles that of a woman. [Arthur]

Weil states also that their pelvic measurements approximate to those
of the female rather than the male.
It

was this imaginative paranoia that produced the great classic

of the physiological school: Ambroise Tardieu’s forensic handbook.
Etude medico-legale sur les attentats aux moeurs (Paris, 1857).* Tardieu

was not a medical pioneer: his supposed discoveries - notably the
‘infundibular’ (funnel-shaped) anus - were already widely accepted as
tell-tale signs.

His real contribution was to introduce an appearance

of precision into the art of detecting ‘pederasts’.
Tardieu, perhaps misled by homosexual fashions, believed that
passive pederasts had enormous bottoms:

‘I

have seen one pederast

whose buttocks were joined and formed a single, perfect sphere.’
In active pederasts, the penis was deformed: it bulged like a snout
or tapered like a dog’s penis, and, for a reason easily imagined, it had
a distinctive

corkscrew shape. As a result, pederasts were unable to

urinate in a straight line.

Curled hair, painted face, open collar, waist tightly corseted so as
to accentuate the figure, fingers, ears and breast loaded with jewels,

*

7th edition: 1878. Translated into

(1898).

German (1860), Spanish (1882) and Italian

No English translation exists.

l4fi]

Country of the Blind
the whole person giving off the smell of the most pungent perfumes,
a handkerchief, flowers or some needlework in the hand - this is the

strange, repulsive and quite rightly suspect physiognomy that betrays
a pederast.

A no less characteristic trait, which I have observed a hundred
times, is the contrast of this false elegance and attention lavished on

appearance with the sordid uncleanliness that would on its own be

enough to make one shun these wretches.
Tardieu’s neurotic details proved to be utterly fascinating. His book

became a bestseller far beyond the medical world. Tardieu, who had

met over 200 ‘pederasts’, had a real gift for expressing that eerie sense
of contact with a strange tribe living side by side with the rest of the

human race.
From now on, a great deal of pseudo-anthropological ingenuity
would be devoted to the task of identifying the species. This, more
than any theoretical or practical position, was one of the main forces
in

19th- and 20th-century homosexual science. It proclaimed the

doctor’s usefulness, the efficiency of his profession or sub-discipline,

and his divinatory skill.
It is

revealing that, as the study of sexual deviance became more

complex and specialized, the detection of signs became increasingly
unscientific. It was as if the terminology had been invented to allow

prejudice and superstition to survive in a modern idiom. Some terms,
in fact, were taken directly from myth. ‘Succubus’ and ‘incubus’ (for

passive and active pederast) were still in medical use at the end of the

19th century.
Constitutional features like body hair and bone size were confused

with acquired habits like smoking and drinking. Many of the supposed
signs - a mincing walk or a penchant for perfume - reflected growing

awareness of homosexual urban life. Most reflected simple, orthodox
notions of masculinity and femininity. The idea that homosexual men

were unable to whistle or spit probably had a popular origin, but it

was incorporated into the medical literature and seriously discussed.
This accounts for one of the odder themes of Havelock Ellis’s Studies
in the Psychology of Sex: ‘He never succeeded in his attempts to whistle’;
‘I

am, perhaps, a better whistler than most men’; ‘It may be added

[47]

Strangers
that inverted women are very often good whistlers; Hirschfeld even

knows two who are public performers in whistling.’
For lesbians, the diagnostic process was simply reversed: they
smoked (in severe cases, cigars), had deep voices and big muscles,
liked sport, and were able to spit, whistle, curse and throw.
Some of the most popular theories - that men and wom.en could
masturbate themselves into a state of sexual inversion, or that an
inability to urinate in a straight line v/as a sign of homosexuality -

must have given

rise

to

some anxious

self-examinations.

These

medical fairy tales served a practical purpose. The precise definition
of what constituted a homosexual allowed the species, in theory, to

be sectioned off and securely identified. By implication, a man vTo

walked stiffly, never looked around in the street and never used eau
de cologne could not be homosexual, whereas a left-handed

man

with small hands and feet, warm skin and feminine handwriting was

probably suffering from a serious disorder.
Ironically, precise definitions also allowed

their disguises. In 1869,

homosexuals to refine

one of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs’ homosexual

correspondents sent him a photograph of himself and told him not
to be surprised by the cigar in his hand:

‘I

must show myself to the

world in the fashions of a man.’ In 1891, Albert Moll revealed that
‘Uranists deliberately try to become heavy smokers to put people off

the scent.’ For Englishmen, an ability to grow a moustache and to

bowl overarm at cricket were valuable assets. In Proust’s A la recherche
du temps perdu,

a

bone-crushing handshake is said to be typical of

German homosexuals. This presumably explains Proust’s own remarkable floppiness. When his friend Antoine Bibesco advised him to grip

the hand more firmly, Proust exclaimed: ‘But people would take me
for an invert!’

The identification game, with its promise of instant wisdom,
became a stubborn habit. The supposed ability of homosexuals to
recognize one another at a glance was a challenge to medical science.

Doctors prided themselves on their ability to replicate by ‘rational’

means the instinctive insights of homosexuals. Throw an object at
the lap of a sitting homosexual, said the Berlin doctor

Magnus

Hirschfeld in 1913, and he will automatically open his legs to catch
it.

A lesbian, being a natural trouser-wearer, will close her legs.
[48]

Country of the Blind
Homosexual men sat on the toilet seat; lesbians stood. Dr Hirschfeld
also described the workings of the 'sidereal pendulum’ - a gold
wedding-ring on

a thread tied

around the right index finger and

held over a silver tablespoon.

The direction of swing reveals the

person’s sexuality: longitudinally or at right angles

= heterosexual;

oblique swinging = homosexual.

The popularity of these parlour games shows how little difference
there was between science and popular wisdom. Little had changed
in 2,000 years. Dio Chrysostom (1st century ad) knew of a man from

Tarsus

who could recognize the character of any individual in an

instant. One man left him baffled. ‘But just as the fellow was leaving,

he sneezed, whereupon our friend immediately cried out that the

man was a catamite.’
Increasingly in the 20th century, this identification game seemed
to

reflect

homophobic paranoia

rather than

scientific

ambition.

Raphael Kirchner’s pseudo-sociological handbook, Woran erkennt man
Homosexuelle? (1908) (‘How to Recognize Homosexuals’), was written

men in key positions’. In 1963, the
Sunday Alirror (London) published a two-page guide on ‘How to
Spot a Possible Homo’ (‘shifty glances’, ‘dropped eyes’ and ‘a fond‘for

employers, managers and

ness for the theatre’). Six years

later,

Psychosexual Disorders (2nd edition,

Clifford Allen’s Textbook of

Oxford University Press, 1969)

was still offering comforting advice to those who feared the presence
of undetected strangers:
It is

not necessary to be homosexual to be able to detect inverts in

casual social life. Although I am normal I have seen many homosexuals

and am able to observe them in a crowd by minute gestures, tones
of speech, and so on. Even on the wireless one can

tell

them by

their speech which is either excessively soft and slightly slurred or else

grating and harsh.
*

The other main current of medical thought also had little to do
with science, though it ran through almost every work on the subject.

Medicine was used to justify morality and to confirm religious beliefs.
Attempts to reconcile medical fact with sexual myth had a long

[49]

Strangers
history. Herodotus attributed the Scythians’ disease to the plundering

of the temple of Aphrodite: the goddess of love had taken revenge

by making them effeminate. In

a

similarly imaginative vein,

an

anatomical treatise by Le Baillif de la Riviere in 1580 claimed that

burns caused by the caustic Dead Sea (the fall-out from Sodom and

Gomorrha) could be cured only by menstrual blood. He also claimed
that sodomy was punished with a disease called gonorrhoea, which
he associated with ‘Gomorrha’.

With the advent of modern medicine,

the notion of vice was

translated into pathological terms. In the 1880s, Cesare

Lombroso

argued that homosexuality was a sign of evolutionary back-sliding.

Now that his skull-measuring science is known to be spurious,
Lombroso looks more like a Grand Inquisitor than a scientist. His
new-fangled terms - ‘degenerative’, ‘atavistic’, ‘criminaloid’, etc. - are
far less

common in his writing than old favourites like ‘lascivious’,

‘perverted’ and ‘turpitude’.
a

A typical Lombroso sentence simply adds

dash of mathematics to the moralizing:

‘If

several

women are

brought together in a prison, their erotic shamelessness is cubed.’

Even with the introduction of professional tools and terminology,
most medical writers still proclaimed their disgust, if only to create
the rhetorical conditions in which the untouchable subject could be
discussed. In 1813, Francois Fodere began the ‘Sodomy’ section of
his forensic manual with a typical show of revulsion: ‘Oh, that I could

avoid sullying my quill with the foul obscenity of pederasts!’ Later,
distaste was conveyed with ugly abstractions.

No one who talked of

‘congenital sexual inversion’ or of ‘cerebro-spinal’ perverts could be

accused of showing undue sympathy. Later still, morality appeared in
the form of pity for ‘unfortunate cases’ or in the notion of redemption.

According to Kenneth Walker’s The Physiology of Sex, which was still
being reprinted by Penguin in 1965, homosexuals often regain their
‘self-respect’

by ‘devoting themselves with enthusiasm

to various

forms of social and philanthropic work’.

The story of Sodom lurked in the back of every doctor’s mind.
Sodomites had survived the fire and brimstone, but their bodies bore
the marks of their perversion and they suffered from horrible diseases.

For some doctors, these stigmata had purely logical explanations: anal
intercourse or venereal disease. Real medical problems did of course

[50]

Country of the Blind
exist

and must have placed ‘sodomites’ in an impossible position.

Byron was said by one of his Greek servants to have consulted an
English doctor in Greece about his boyfriend Giraud’s ‘ragged funda-

ment, arising from the frequent distension of the podex in antiphysical
concubinage’. The only consolation was that this embarrassing complaint had an interesting pedigree, having been ‘frequent among the

ancient Greek and Roman cinaedP.

The other commonly recorded complaint was a pustular venereal
disease called crystalline, also known as ‘the Ganymedes’ syphilis’.

A

male brothel in Paris in the 1820s retained doctors who specialized
in the treatment of the disease. Paresis (dementia and paralysis caused

by syphilis) was also thought at one time to be a homosexual disease,
hence the name given to a meeting place for ‘fairies’ in 1890s New
York: Paresis Hall.

Most sodomite illnesses existed only in doctors’ minds. Samuel
Tissot claimed in his famous treatise on onanism (continually in print
in several languages from

to ‘cancers in the

1758 to 1905) that ‘sapphists’ were prone

womb’, ‘caused by movements and by frictions

which are far from natural’. Several German doctors, from the 1830s,
thought that pederasty led to tuberculosis, dropsy and typhoid. Some
suggested that genital deformities associated with ‘unnatural’ acts

were a pathological trait of ‘pederasts’, whether or not they performed
the acts in question.
‘Disease’

had been used

as a

metaphor for homosexuality long

before the 1 9th century, but as doctors became more skilled at finding
connections, local complaints could be interpreted as signs of a more

profound disorder. Pustules, cancers and ragged fundaments were a

warning from Nature that she did not after all tolerate sexual deviance.

The writer of the ‘Orgasme’ article (1874) in the Larousse

encyclopedia scrupulously admitted that ‘artificial means’ (those used

by homosexuals) would produce a bona fide orgasm, but he went on
to observe, with obvious relief, that Nature concurred with morality,

many diseases come from unnatural pleasures’.
The notion that AIDS was a special punishment for gay people

‘for

was just the latest version of an ancient idea.

[51]

Strangers

The dominance of local moral attitudes in medical approaches to
homosexuality is also visible in the geographical spread of sexologists.

Almost all the early works on the subject were French or German.
There was increasing interest in Italy and the United States from
the mid- 1880s. But in Britain, there was almost total silence. Sir

Alexander Morison included ‘monomania with unnatural propensity’
in his Physiognomy of Mental Diseases (1838), and there was an article

on the phrenological concept of ‘Adhesiveness’ in The Lancet of 6
August 1836:
Adhesiveness. - I knew two gentlemen whose attachment to each
other was so excessive, as to amount to a disease. When the one visited
the other, they slept in the same bed, sat constantly alongside of each

other at table, spoke in affectionate whispers, and were, in short,
miserable when separated.
Little else of a medical nature was said in Britain until Havelock
Ellis’s Sexual Inversion, which struggled into print in

1897.* Even the

fearless Malthusian, George Drysdale, whose Elements of Social Science

(1854) called for open debate of ‘the sexual questions’, avoided the
subject.

There were English translations of Casper (1861-5) and

Krafft-Ebing (1892) (see pp. 58, 57), but for decades, practically the
only British medical authority was The Principles and Practice of Medical
Jurisprudence (1865) by Alfred Taylor,

who merely alluded to false

charges made ‘by soldiers and a bad class of policemen’. He preferred
to leave the matter to lawyers. Later editions covered the topic with

two picturesque cases of transvestism.
The British Medical Journal remained pruriently hostile well into
the 20th century. In 1902, it recommended Krafft-Ebing’s book as a

handy source of toilet-paper. In 1909, in a review of Edward Carpenter’s

The Intermediate Sex, it suggested that homosexuals should

emigrate en masse and leave ‘serious people in England’ in peace.

This British black-out has sometimes been attributed to a prag-

*

Written in collaboration with the scholar and poet J. A. Symonds, it first appeared

in Germany as Das kontrare Geschlechtsgefuhl (Leipzig, 1896). The entire print-run of

the first English edition was bought up and destroyed by Symonds’ heirs. The 2nd
edition, without

Symonds’ name, appeared under the fictitious imprint, ‘Watford

University Press’.

[

5 ^]

Country of the Blind
matic reluctance to indulge in flowery Continental theorizing, but it
surely has

more to do with prudery. The Larousse encyclopedia

(1864-76) contains enough material for a very large book on homosexuality

from prehistory to the present. The 1911 Encyclopaedia

Britannica is comprehensively silent. ‘Lesbian’ appears in the index,

but only as an architectural term: ‘Lesbian leaf.

On the Continent, doctors were less squeamish, but even there,
social

and professional considerations were more consistently influ-

ential than medical findings.

Before the 1870s, most writers owed their information to ancient

Glimpses of a thriving and wide-

texts or to first-hand experience.

spread homosexual culture appeared in studies of prostitutes, convicts

and criminals. In 1791, Karl Philipp Moritz had published accounts
of two men ‘who manifested an enthusiastic love for persons of their

own sex’. In 1852, a forensic doctor, Johann Ludwig Casper, revealed
the amazing world of ‘mental hermaphrodites’: his article ‘On Rape

and Pederasty’ was based on the confiscated diary of a Count who

had belonged to a very active ‘Pederasts Club’ that seemed to contain
a fair cross-section

of German society. Even more dramatically, in

1864, a journalist and former jurist called Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

published the first of twelve texts calling for legal reform (see p. 181).
Ulrichs himself was homosexual and his theory that ‘Urnings’* were
a separate sex was adopted by several doctors, usually in Latin: 'anima

muliehris in corpore virili inclusa'^

woman’s soul shut up in a man’s

(‘a

body’).

In the 1870s and 1880s, doctors, mostly French and

German,

began to reduce this soup of information to something that could be

The same authorities appeared

divided up along disciplinary lines.

again and again, as thesis directors, journal editors and preface writers.

A professional community was taking shape. Before the end of the
century, conferences and journals

had given certain approaches

a

dynastic respectability. Each doctor’s conclusions reflected his training

and

*

his preferred field of action.

Anatomists clung to the genital

Ulrichs’ neologisms, ‘Urning’ (Uranist or Uranian) and ‘Dioning’ (Dionian),

come from Plato’s Symposium^ where ‘heavenly love’ is associated with Aphrodite,
daughter of Uranus, and ‘common love’ with Aphrodite, daughter of Dione.

[S3]

Strangers
explanation. Public health experts worried about epidemics of inversion. Alienists saw sexual deviance as a sign of madness. Determinists

warned of degeneration. Few doctors found evidence to suggest that
their own approach was not the best.

By the end of the 1880s, the medical profession was supplying
enough information of its own, packaged in the correct terminology,
to do without outside help. Julien Chevalier’s 520-page study of sexual

inversion (1893) was based on second-hand cases (actually, third-hand,
since the patients’ accounts

Chevalier’s

book

in

had already been digested by doctors).

turn was used by later writers. Spectacular,

untypical cases were recycled and had a disproportionate effect. One

of the

‘classic’

early case

studies,

described in Claude Alichea’s

‘Des deviations maladives de I’appetit venerien’ (1849), was a man
convicted of necrophilia.

Medical self-confidence thrived on an ability to reach conclusions

no matter what. The most original aspect of Freud’s Three Essays on
the Theofj of Sexuality (1905) is not the separation of sexual instinct

from sexual object but the quite exceptional confession of partial
ignorance:

‘It

will

be seen that we are not in a position to base a

satisfactory explanation for the origin of inversion upon the material
at present before us.’

The main problem was not a lack of intelligence or hatred of
homosexuals but a professional desire to wring fresh ideas out of a
subject that could not support them. Doctors who thought long and

hard about homosexuality even after exhausting

produce reliable conclusions trod

a

its

capacity to

backward path from common

sense to make-believe. Freud’s disciple, the Hungarian doctor Sandor
Ferenczi,

is

a typical

example. In 1906, he urged his colleagues in

Budapest to accept ‘uranism’ as a naturally occurring form of sexuality

and called for decriminalization. The following year, he discovered
Freud, decided that uranism was a kind of neurosis, and began to

develop theories of his own. He concluded that homosexuality was
a form of coprophilia (an abnormal interest in faeces), expressed in a

fondness for perfume and the arts.
*

[54]

Country of the Blind
Surprisingly,

confident and

this

homosexuality brought with

lively

confusion

about

something that eventually looked

it

very much like progress. In 1868, Wilhelm Griesinger, a doctor at
the Charite asylum in Berlin, had published an article ‘On a Little-

Known Psychopathic Condition’. He defined homosexuality as an
inherited, mental condition and called for study of the patient’s mind.

The article appeared in a new journal founded by Griesinger, the
Archiv fur Psychiatric und Nervenkrankheiten. In the same journal,
the following year, Griesinger’s successor, Carl Westphal, published
his report on a session of the Berlin Medical-Psychological Society

in which various pathological and ethnographic cases were discussed,

and then, in 1870, his article on ‘contrary sexual feeling’.

The definition itself was not the turning-point. The association of
homosexual behaviour with a mental condition had been commonplace since the early 1 9th century and was more widely accepted than

the small

number of texts might suggest. Long before Westphal -

without always specifying the vice in question - doctors had described
‘vicious

tendencies’

and

‘guilty

passions’

as

forms of instinctive

behaviour caused by a ‘psycho-organic predisposition’. Pleas of
insanity were lodged in English sodomy trials at least as early as 1822.

In 1841, Hubert Lauvergne had discovered a ‘third sex’ in the prison
hulks at Toulon - a special variety of human being with

its

own

physical and mental features, discernible to a trained eye: wispy beard,

moist eye, indolence, etc. The term ‘third sex’, also used by Gautier

and Balzac, suggested that these strange creatures occupied a natural
or social niche of their own. In 1853, a Prussian doctor, Hieronymous
Frankel, after studying a homosexual curtain-hanger called Siisskind

Blank, applied the old Roman term ^homo moms'* to the new species
{mollis = ‘soft’ or ‘effeminate’).

From this point of view, ^homo mollis* could hardly be defined by
something as superficial as genital misuse. If, as Casper claimed, the
condition was innate,

it

was of no immediate concern to forensic

medicine.

The real change, which was gradual rather than sudden, lay not in
the definition of homosexuality as a mental state but in the relationship of homosexual and doctor. Both Griesinger and Westphal were
liberal reformers who opposed the use of restraints in the treatment of

[55]

Strangers
psychiatric patients. Their innovation was to urge a kind of practical

sympathy. Patients should be listened to instead of being treated as
perverts. Faces, not genitals, should be the focus of attention.

Unlikely as it might now appear, the definition of homosexuality
as a mental illness or congenital flaw seemed to many people, on both

sides of the doctor’s table, to be a step in the right direction. It

implied some awareness that homosexuality was a state of being rather

than an acquired habit. It presented legal reformers with a powerful

though demeaning argument (see p. 184). And it changed the nature
of what for some was the only chance for honest self-expression: the

medical consultation.

However ignorant or insensitive, the new breed of doctor could
be treated as a confidant or confessor. This was an obvious improve-

ment. Until the 1880s, most meetings of doctor and homosexual had
taken place in prisons and hospitals. Even then - though the following

pages might suggest a sudden enlightenment - older forms of treat-

ment survived. The psychiatrists’ predecessors, who were taught to
look for visible signs, continued to treat homosexuals like livestock.
Charles Vibert’s Pi^ecis de medecine legale (1893) is a late but typical
example:
Exajninatmi of Pede?’asts. - For this, the individual
well-lit

room, made to bend

his torso so that the

is

placed in a

head

is

almost

touching the floor, the buttocks are parted with one hand, one notes
the appearance of the anus, then one introduces a finger into the
orifice, so as to appreciate fully the resistance of the sphincter. [Etc.]

Some doctors explained precisely how to overcome resistance. Acts
of love were often prudishly cited in Latin. The same precaution was
rarely used for hardcore descriptions of scientific rape. At a medical

conference in Berlin in 1890, Carl Liman described a case in which
the patient had been probed, in a single session, by eight ‘lubricated
fingers’.
all

The eight doctors subsequently issued eight reports which

contradicted one other. As Dr Brouardel pointed out in an article

of 1880, the classic sign of pederasty - the famous funnel-shaped anus

~ could easily be produced by the cold hands of an energetic doctor.
This would explain why doctors’ findings became more consistent as
they perfected their inspection techniques.

[5d]

Country of the Blind
Anal inspection was the last stand of physiologists against the rising

became increasingly rare as a diagnostic
tool towards the end of the century, though it was used for a long
discipline of psychiatry. It

time in municipal inspections of French brothels. (Female prostitutes
in French North Africa knowingly referred to the intrusive instrument
as ‘the Government’s penis’.)

Although

physical

greater importance was

characteristics

remained

a

preoccupation,

now attached to the words of the patients

themselves. Case studies in the epic Psychopathia sexualis (1886) by

Richard von Krafft-Ebing* usually contained a few remarks on physi-

ology (voice, body hair, hip size, etc.) and a summary of perversion

and illness in the family, but the bulk was made up of the patient’s
autobiography, albeit in reported speech:
Case 163. Homosexuality.

S.J.,

Sought my medical

38, governess.

advice for a nervous problem. Father was intermittently insane and

died of a brain disease. Patient is an only child. Even in early infancy,
suffered

from anxiety and excruciating fancies - e.g. waking up in a

coffin after it had been closed, inadvertently saying something shameful
in confession.

[.

.

.]

The patient has never been attracted to a member of the opposite
sex and has considered marriage only as a means of support.

She did

however feel strongly attracted to girls. At first she interpreted her
proclivity as friendship, but the fervour of her attachments

constant deep yearning for her friends

and the

made her realize that these

feelings were something more than friendship.

[.

.

.]

The patient, who looks entirely feminine and highly respectable,
claims never to have felt that she was playing a particular [sexual] role

with her friends, even in happy dreams.

Feminine pelvis, large mammaries, no hint of beard growth.

Quite unexpectedly, Psychopathia sexualis and later compendia of
case studies served as a kind of international bulletin board for homo-

sexual men and women. There was a huge repressed demand for a

public forum. Within four years of its publication, Otto de Joux

*

14th revised edition in 1912. Translations: Italian (1889), English (Philadelphia

and London, 1892) and French (1895).

[57]

Strangers
received 736 letters thanking him for writing his defence of homosexual love, Die Enterbten des LiebesglUckes (1893) (‘The Disinherited

of Love’s Happiness’). Already in 1864, after the publication of his
first

two pamphlets on ‘The Riddle of Man-Manly Love’, Ulrichs

had been inundated with letters from ‘Urnings near and far’. His
later

pamphlets, which incorporate his correspondents’ views, are a

talking-shop rather than a soap-box. The 1st edition of Krafft-Ebing’s

study (1886) contained forty- five cases; the 12th edition (1903) contained 238. Some of these books were bestsellers and were reprinted

many times. Casper’s single case, described in an article (1852) and
Handbuch (1858), spawned several other
accounts, often supplied by anonymous readers who were clearly
then

in

his

Practisches

neither criminal nor insane.

A 5th edition appeared in 1871, revised

by his nephew Carl Liman. Other cases were published by Casper in
his Klinische Novellen (1863). Until about 1880, articles on the subject

outnumbered case studies. In 1870, Westphal could refer to only a
handful of cases. In 1913, Magnus Hirschfeld’s Die Homosexualitdt

was based on more than 10,000 cases.

Even digested and medicalized by the doctor, the case history was
form that allowed otherwise silent individuals to discuss
their sexuality. It also made medical texts more accessible to the
a literary

general public.

Of course, this was hardly a perfect state of affairs.

Aleister Crowley supposed, with a touch of envy, that Krafft-Ebing’s

book had ‘attained its enormous popularity’ because it was used as
pornography. If so, it was a fearsomely hygienic form of eroticism in
which the key passages were printed in surgical Latin: ‘She found
sexual satisfaction only in corpore feminae' (Krafft-Ebing); ‘Only exceptionally did

he dare to socios concumbentes tangere et masturbationem

mutuam adseqiiP (Krafft-Ebing); ‘When the Uranist thinks that no
one

is

looking, he likes to direct his gaze in earn directionem ubi

membrum virile esf (Moll).
To view these clinical consultations through the one-way mirror
of the distant present is to be painfully aware of vast discrepancies

between the patient’s experience and the doctor’s opinions. Accounts

might have been quite rational acquired an air of insanity or
had been
depravity in the retelling. A man called Eranz E.
that

.

arrested in 1871 for

.

making ‘obscene propositions’ to a watchman

[58]

Country of the Blind
and was committed to an asylum. The case was described by Dr
Servaes in Westphal’s Archiv fiir Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten in

1876

:

He confesses that he has had sexual relations with men and that he
experienced the greatest possible pleasure. He interprets Holy Scripture so as to glorify his vice. He has an insurmountable aversion for
women and has never been able to have relations with them. He
advocates marriage between men, and claims that he could easily prove
its

legitimacy and worth. He adds,

‘I

recognize men like myself at a

glance, just from their expression. I have never approached such people
in vain.’

Franz E.

.

.’s

intuition seems (but perhaps only seems) to have deserted

him in the asylum. ‘He invites the doctor to share his bed’, noted the
dispassionate Servaes.
*

Beyond the asylum and the surgery, the theories of the early
sexologists were not necessarily pernicious. The alleged causes of
homosexuality stirred the imagination and made it possible for homosexual men and women to view their sexuality as an inherent part of
life’s

pattern rather than as an aberration. Theories were not just

abstractions: they

were

stories that identified

common traits and

prevented individual cases from surviving in isolation. Medical concepts like ‘contrary sexual feeling’ and ‘the intermediate sex’ were the

templates of tales that could

make sense of life in all its details:

the shape of one’s hand, the behaviour of one’s parents, a predilection
for the colour green.

The autobiographical accounts tended to project a view of homosexuality that was more in keeping with common experience than
with medical prejudice. The idea that it was a psychopathic condition
or a vice looked increasingly dubious.
mid-life transvestites,

Ebing (seventeen

all

With the exception of four

forty-four homosexuals studied by Krafft-

women

and twenty-seven

men

aged between

twenty-two and fifty-five) had always been attracted only to people
of their own sex. All of them identified their sexual inclination - often
quite happily - as a deviation from the norm. All had become aware

[59]

Strangers
of their feelings at puberty or long before. The average age of first

awareness for the men who gave a date was just under ten, but several
others used phrases like ‘from the beginning’, ‘very early’ and

‘as

long as I can remember’. For the women, the average was just over
fourteen. Two of them traced their feelings back to ‘earliest infancy’.

The sudden availability of homosexual autobiographies is more
significant than their individual details.

Once published, they could

be read and reinterpreted without the

scientific

people

trimmings.

Many

who had thought themselves unique were thrilled to read

about a world in which they were normal. It is easy to imagine the
reaction of lonely readers to these revelatory accounts. This letter,

was sent anonymously to Dr Casper by a young man

for example,

who had read his article ‘On Rape and Pederasty’:
I was so unhappy because I thought I was the only such strange creature

in existence. Many times the pistol lay before me.

Only my religious

upbringing prevented me from committing a crime.

You may laugh when I say this, but it’s the pure truth: often in my
sadness I threw myself down in the dust before God - or, if you prefer,
the Devil. Yet in my heart a voice spoke so clearly that I thought that

someone was in the room. It said, ‘Go to the Linden!’ [the promenade
in Berlin]
A week later, I went back there and formed an acquaintance that has had a huge influence on my life. He was a beautiful
[.

.

.]

young person of the highest society - happily dead now for years!
Before long, we loved each other tenderly, and, through him, I came
to know several other fellow sufferers.
I

went to England; then I buried my love. Later, I spent more time

in Paris, Italy and Vienna, and everywhere I found poor creatures like

myself!

[.

.

.]

On the Righi [above Genoa], in Palermo, in the Louvre,

in the highlands of Scotland, in St Petersburg

and at the docks in

Barcelona I found people I had never seen before but who became
attached to me in an instant, and I to them. Can this really be a crime?
[...]! may never see them again but I think of them as often as they

think of me and we shall never forget one another. Even now, I am

hastening away to the South [.

.

.]

Similar journeys from darkness to light were described by many

other patients.

A thirty-one-year-old bachelor in Krafft-Ebing’s

Psychopathia sexualis had enjoyed an active sex life since the age of

[6o]

Country of the Blind
fourteen: ‘I could write volumes about my acquaintances, who number

over 500.’ Another had lived with a man for years ‘like husband and
wife’. Relatively

suggests a

few had had

difficulty in finding partners,

which

much sunnier climate than the words ‘Victorian under-

world’ imply. When writing his memoirs (unpublished until 1984),
J.

A.

than

Symonds only suspected that his condition was ‘commoner
I

imagine’. After reading Casper and Krafft-Ebing, he was

happily ‘aware that my history is only one out of a thousand’.

This accidental, therapeutic function of the medical profession is
perhaps its only lasting contribution to homosexual happiness. Even
if

some readers had no access to the urban networks, they could still

find relief in the act of confession. The doctor was a representative

of society and the confessional letter was a kind of coming out, albeit

very private and polite. Krafft-Ebing’s patients were grateful, not for
his anxious expertise, but for his attentive ear:

No one suspects my true nature. You, a stranger, are the only one
who knows me, and you know me more intimately, in the most
important respect, than father, mother, friend or lover. It has done me

good to be able to divulge that bizarre, oppressive secret.
First, I

must beg your forgiveness, dear Sir, for importuning you

with my writing. I had lost all self-control and become a monster in

my own eyes. I disgusted myself But then your writing restored my
courage and I resolved to get to the bottom of the matter and to look

back over my life, no matter what the result. [.
I hope, after reading your works,

citizen, father

.

.]

that if I fulfil my duties as doctor,

and husband, I may count myself among those who

deserve something better than scorn.

These reports from the unknown continent

also

helped

to

enlighten friends and relatives. The lesbian heroine of Radclyffe Hall’s

The Well of Loneliness (1928) discovers, after her father’s death, that

he had been poring over Krafft-Ebing in an attempt to understand
his daughter. Magnus Hirschfeld knew of a man in Berlin who sus-

pected his son of sexual abnormality. He read the medical literature,

boy as ‘a born homosexual’ and gave his blessing to
him and his partner. Even if understanding came too late, there was
identified the

[6i]

Strangers
still

the hope of a posthumous reconciliation.

A suicide note, written

by a man called x\lfred Slova, was published by Otto de Joux in 1897:
Dear Mizzi, forgive me
Read Psychopathia sexualis and you will no longer curse me for

Father, Mother, forgive me! / cannot help it\
too.

having left you in such a shameful fashion. [.

.

.]

Forgive me as I have

forgiven you.

Case studies became so popular, so

quickly, that

some doctors

began to complain about the glut of information. At the third
Congress of Criminal Anthropology in Brussels in 1892, Dr de Rode
claimed to be swamped with ‘repulsive details’ of ‘pitiful triviality’.
Flis patients were

selves.

using medical science, he felt, to exonerate them-

Dr Fritz Strassmann complained in

1895 that no Urning

ever visited the surgery without bringing along a ready-to-publish

manuscript.

Some doctors thought that incredible accounts of a

flourishing homosexual underworld proved that homosexuals were
constitutional liars, addicted to gossip and navel-gazing.

People who were wrestling with their sexuality and who were asked
to talk about their problems were often understandably verbose. It

took a certain amount of autobiographical fluency to describe a life
of shame and secrecy or, for that matter, a life of defiance and illicit
pleasure. The young Italian aristocrat who sent his ‘human document’
to

Emile Zola, hoping to be immortalized in one of his novels,

would have been just as vain with a different sexual inclination. As
he discovered when passing a bookshop one day, Zola had sent his
letter to a doctor called Georges Saint-Paul. It was published in Saint-

Paul’s study of inversion in

1896 as the ‘Novel of a Born Invert’.

I wrote these pages this evening with the most intense enjoyment. The
room is very cheerful with its warm carpets, all the gas lamps lit, and
the sounds of a busy hotel. I am almost happy; but how long will it

last?

[.

.

.]

This will have to be the last page, otherwise I’d never finish and I’d
send you a whole book which would eventually wear you out. I always
think I’ve finished and then I always find something else to tell you;
besides which,

I

enjoy writing about my little self so much that I’d

never stop summoning up my image and looking at it in these pages.
It

seems to me that one can never tire of talking about oneself and

[62]

Country of the Blind
studying oneself in the tiniest detail, especially if Nature has made one

- as it made me - such an exceptional being.

On 30 April 1897, a French philosophy teacher called Georges
Herelle wrote a long reply to the book by Saint-Paul. The letter was

never sent.

He bequeathed it, along with a large file of notes on

Greek love and the minutes of conversations with like-minded friends,
to the library of Troyes. Publication was out of the question: his only

readership was the faceless future. But the medical literature at least

allowed him to enjoy a semblance of dialogue. This was surely a

common reaction to the medical colonization of homosexuality:
Books like yours. Monsieur, produce in minds like mine a swirl of
contradictory thoughts and feelings - first, passionate curiosity, then,

depending on the chapter or the paragraph, deep delight or angry
frustration [...];

and finally, when the storm has passed,

a kind

of

gratitude.

[...]! am not expecting you to cure me; I do not consider myself
ill

in the usual, accepted sense of the word.

But you have spoken to

me at length about myself, my inner life, the most intimate, essential
and secret part of myself. This makes you a confidant and a friend,
even when you offend me.

Thanks to you, for a few hours or days, I have been able to feel
stirring within myself thoughts that are stifled by the monotony of life.
I

have felt the passion that is deadened by social constraints and the

need for constant secrecy. And so I readily forgive you the occasional
epithet such as ‘repulsive’, ‘disgraceful’, etc. What do I care about your

opinion anyway, I who am unknown and anonymous - a mere case?

At this stage, it was still possible to feel some sense of a collaborative endeavour. Simply by writing about homosexuality, doctors were

also taking risks - small in comparison, but real none the less. The

French prospectus for the 1893 French translation of Albert Moll’s
Die contrare Sexualempfmdung was prosecuted by moral campaigners.
In England, Havelock Ellis’s Sexual Inversion (1897) was indicted as a
‘lewd, wicked, bawdy, scandalous libel’.

Some doctors used pseudonyms. Saint-Paul wrote as ‘Dr Laupts’.
Those who wrote under their real names were careful to specify their
audience. On page xxiv of his study of sexual inversion (1893), Julien

[63]

Strangers
Chevalier told women that they were not to read it. He also took the

unusual step (so he claimed) of making it extremely difficult to read.
‘I

sincerely

hope that my book will have limited publicity and a

merely local success.’ The sale of Dr W. C. Rivers’ pamphlet on Walt
Whitman's Anomaly (London, 1913) was ‘restricted to members of the

and medical professions’, and Earl Lind’s Autobiography of an
Androgyne, prefaced by Dr Alfred Herzog (New York, 1918), was ‘sold
legal

only, by mail order, to physicians, lawyers, legislators, psychologists,

and sociologists’. Most books on the subject were unobtainable in the

United States without a note from the doctor.
This uneasy situation continued for some time, especially in
Britain.

Readers at the Bodleian Library are still reminded of the

censorship that was silently practised by individuals. Even dour,
unillustrated

works on homosexuality that were not legally banned

were catalogued away into the

‘Phi’ (^) collection, as late as the

1970s. Until 2002, they had to be requested in person and consulted

under observation in a special room.*
*

According to theories

inspired by Eoucault, the laboratorial

approach, even in a benign form, replaced fear of the law with selfloathing.

The medical ‘invention’ of homosexuality, in this view,

transfused society’s

homophobia into the homosexual bloodstream.

The old religious sanctions were internalized and experienced as
feelings of guilt

and inadequacy. After

a

few decades of medical

discourse, every homosexual, even without living the sordid

life

of

Wilde’s Dorian Gray, would have a hideous portrait of himself hidden

away in the attic.

The real situation was far more confused. The well-travelled young
man who wrote to Casper felt shame and self-loathing long before
psychiatric interest in the subject. Krafft-Ebing’s correspondent, the

self-proclaimed ‘monster’ quoted above, began to think of himself as

*

For example, RafFalovich, Uranisme et unisexualite (1896); Symonds, A Problem in

Greek Ethics (1908); Hirschfeld, Sexualgeschichte der Menschheit (1929); several editions
of Iwan Bloch’s sociological studies (1901-38); Cory, The Homosexual Outlook (1953);

Humphreys, Tearoom Trade (1970); Karlen, Sexuality and Homosexuality (1971); Hocquenghem. Homosexual Desire (1978).

[64]

Country of the Blind
a

respectable person only -after reading other case studies.

Many

people who confided in doctors considered themselves diseased but

without necessarily feeling shame for that reason. Seeking treatment

was not always a sign of self-hatred. In turn-of-the-century America,
Earl Lind and Claude Hartland consulted doctors even while enjoying
a busy sex life.

Homosexual men and women consulted doctors

for

various

complex reasons: self-exploration, the pleasure of divulging a secret,
the desire to find a limited form of social integration, or simply an

attempt to cope with problems caused by homosexuality rather than
with homosexuality itself.

The full humiliating effect of medical discourse was not felt until
well into the 20th century, when superstitions adopted by the medical
•

profession returned to the

community emblazoned with technical

terms. Liberated gays like

Edmund White and Martin Duberman

spent years looking for a psychoanalytic cure. Nineteenth-century

homosexuals were untroubled in comparison.

The main source of suffering was not theoretical but social. J. A.
Symonds wrote of ‘a perpetual discord between spontaneous appetite
and acquired respect for social law’. Earl Lind visited many doctors

and read the medical literature, but this only strengthened his conviction that he had a right to be congenitally different:
Is it right to chastise a

horse because he prefers to munch hay out of

manger instead of walking into his owner’s dining-room; throwing
himself backwards into an enormous chair; squeezing with difficulty a
spoon between his two front hoofs; and with it carrying to his mouth
a

ice-cream and French pastry?

This equine

American

woman,

self-portrait

society,

‘Miss

was inspired by Lind’s experience of

not by medical textbooks.

L.’,

who

consulted

A fifty-five-year-old

Krafft-Ebing

delighted to learn that she was abnormal:

‘I

was

positively

am comforted by the

thought that moral laws were made only for normal people and
cannot be binding on abnormal people.’

A surprisingly common source of anxiety caused by medical texts
seems^ to have been the simple realization that homosexual acts were

disapproved of or against the law:

[65]

Strangers
Miss M. can see nothing wrong in her feelings; and, until, at the
age of 28, she came across the translation of Krafft-Ebing’s book, she

had no idea ‘that feelings like mine were “under the ban of society” as
he puts it, or were considered unnatural and depraved’. (Ellis, case 37)
After reading Psychopathia sexualis, he became terrified of himself and

of the possibility of legal punishment. He forced himself to avoid sexual
relations with men. This abstinence caused him many wet dreams and
also neurasthenia.

For that reason he sought medical help.

(Krafft-

Ebing, case 154)

Evidence of a negative effect on the homosexual psyche could be

found in the fact that homosexual men and women seem to have
adopted the medical terminology almost as soon as it was invented.

But schoolchildren often acquire an astonishingly detailed knowledge
of educational theory without changing their behaviour. It is easy to

be misled by statements made to doctors. (The doctors could of
course select the accounts that proved their theories.) Heterosexuals

wrote with a tacit, unconscious assumption of a fundamentally sympathetic audience. In homosexual writings, a neutral context can never

be assumed.
Self-accusations were often opportunistic. Claude Hartland was
able to publish an account of his sexual experiences by subtitling his
Story ofa Life ‘for the consideration of the medical fraternity’ (St Louis,

1901). Oscar Wilde’s famous self-diagnosis as a mental invalid was not
a personal confession, it was part of a petition for his release written

while he was at Reading Gaol: ‘the terrible offences of which [I] was
rightly found guilty [.

.

.]

are forms of sexual madness [.

.

.]

diseases to

be cured by a physician rather than crimes to be punished by a judge.’

Sometimes, abject self-diagnosis was
listener.

a

kind of courtesy to the

Georges Herelle told Dr Laupts that ‘all true inverts’ not

only took what doctors said with a pinch of salt, they also believed
that the doctors themselves were homosexual and that all their talk

about aberrations was just a large and garish fig-leaf: ‘Be in no doubt:
this is

In

why your desk is flooded with confessions.’
there is just as much evidence for the ‘construction’ of

fact,

medical discourse by homosexuals as there is for the medical construction of homosexuality. Benedict Friedlander even suggested in 1907

[

66

]

Country of the Blind
that doctors

were beginning to abandon the

‘sickness’

theory of

homosexuality under pressure from their patients: ‘They had

to,

of course, or their clients would have left them.’

Many of the classification systems and technical terms that sound
as though they were imposed by doctors were actually invented and

publicized by homosexuals - even the more elaborate systems: those

of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, whose theories were more influential than
those of any Victorian doctor (see p. 181), and Magnus Hirschfeld’s,

who devised four scales of ‘sexual intermediacy’ including eighty-one
fundamental types.

There was a simple, practical advantage in devising technical terms.

made it easier to discuss ‘the nameless sin’;

Classification systems

they helped to distinguish ‘normal’ homosexuals from prostitutes,
transvestites

and the criminally insane; and they gave homosexual

desire a kind of legitimacy.

Some of the terms were borrowed fi'om

botany (unisexual, monosexual, bisexual, etc.) and implied that homosexuality was part of the grand plan of Nature. Above all, classification

led to the revolutionar)^ idea that other people

were not normal,

they were simply heterosexual. If there were ‘Uranians’ (in Ulrichs’

scheme), there must also be ‘Dionians’.

The word ^Homosexualitiif itself was invented,mot by a doctor, but
(probably) by a peripatetic Hungarian man of letters called Kertbeny
(Karl Maria Benkert, 182^82). It was first used, along with 'Homosexualisten\ in a letter to Ulrichs in

1868 and then in two pamphlets

(Leipzig, 1869). The word was intended as a neutral term, applicable
to both men and women, and was probably coined at the same time
as ^Heterosexualitat\

later printed in

which first appeared in a text of unknown date

Gustav Jaeger’s Die Entdeckiing der Seek in 1880.

^Homosexualitdf and foreign equivalents were not

commonly used

until the early 20th century.

awkward encounters of two strange tribes,
exchanging terms and trading insights, were seldom one-sided. Not
all homosexuals were the passive victims of interfering ideologues and
Clearly, then, these

medical missionaries.

One doctor even discovered in the course of

treatment that he himself was homosexual. ‘Thereafter he adopted
inverted practices and ceased to find any attraction in women.’

The traditional view of 19th-century homosexuals as a helpless.

[67]

Strangers
silent minority, blinking in the torchlight of investigative doctors,

should at least be called into question. Compared to what now looks
like a rubbish-heap of superstitions dressed up as science, the contri-

made by homosexual men and women to medical science
monument to common sense. Their influence was broad and

butions
are a

beneficial.

Notions of ‘Nature’ were shown to be hopelessly crude

and contradictory. Standard definitions of masculinity and femininity
-

proved to be scientifically worthless. Sickness and perversion began to
look like relative concepts. Historical and anthropological precedents

showed that Victorian society was not the only state of civilization.
The sexuality of any individual - homosexual or not - was seen to
have its own peculiarities. The old bugbear of anal intercourse turned
out not to be peculiar to the homosexual population.
Inspected at close quarters, the entire

human race appeared to

be ‘abnormal’. If, as many claimed, there was a direct link between
‘onanism’ and ‘uranism’, and if, as Dr J. Christian supposed in the
Dictionnaire

encyclopedique

des

sciences

medicales

in

1881,

‘solitary

manoeuvres were almost universally practised’, did that not mean
that practically everyone was a ‘pervert’ or might become one at any

moment?
The immense power attributed to theorizing doctors has concealed
the splendid irony: the repressed homosexual minority had a huge

and stimulating effect on the world of ideas. The medical profession,

by contrast, devoted much of its ingenuity to avoiding the insights
provided by its patients.

The real, tangible deterioration wrought by medical interference
was practical, not psychological. The medicalization of homosexuality
threatened to replace the judge and the prison guard with the doctor

and the asylum nurse. The definition of homosexuality as a mental
illness opened the way to a practice that was both benign and sinister:

the treatment of something that was not susceptible to treatment.
*

Systematic attempts to cure homosexuality were rare before the
most ‘cures’ were either legal (imprisonment or
death) or religious (penance or death). In January 1852, when Gogol
1880s. Until then,

confessed his sinful leanings to a priest, he was advised to abstain

[

68 ]

Country of the Blind
from sleep and food until his soul was clean. He died of starvation in
February. The priest was unrepentant: ‘A physician is not blamed

when the seriousness of the illness makes him prescribe strong medicine to his patient.’

The only widely applied medical cures were developed to combat
masturbation, which was thought to be a cause of homosexuality.
Usually, this meant cold showers. Katherine Mansfield seems to have

been sent to take
‘unnatural

a

cold-water cure in Bavaria because of her

relationships’.

The same remedy was

applied

by Dr

Kiernan of Chicago in 1884 to a young lesbian who later married
her lover’s brother. (Kiernan concluded that the treatment had been
successful.) William Acton preferred ‘the tepid sponge-bath’, while Dr

Hammond of New York complemented the cold baths with outdoor
exercise and the study of mathematics.
If homosexuality

had a specific cause, it followed that the cause

had simply to be removed. Sexual ardour should be cooled, the idle
should be put to work, boys from boarding-schools should be intro-

duced to girls, and libertines should be inspired with the fear of God.
Prevention rather than cure was the norm. Boys at Wellington

School in the 1870s lay in their cubicles at night, staring up at the

barbed wire that Headmaster Benson had installed to prevent nocturnal depravity. Adults

were simply advised to remove themselves

from temptation.

The more ingenious and drastic cures seem to have been applied
by homosexuals to themselves before they ever occurred to physicians.
Albert Moll had a patient who asked to be cured by castration. The
first

known person to think of using electricity to combat homosexual

passion was a gay French engineer in 1878.

Most Victorian doctors were more cautious and more sensitive to
the evidence than their 20th-century descendants. When they were

confronted with normal inhabitants of the strange new world, and

not just with the few mad or criminal cases captured on raids,

it

became apparent that something was wrong. Many doctors were
bemused by an apparent lack of pathological or physiological defects.
There was, it seemed, such a thing as an intelligent, happy and healthy
homosexual. Some were astonished to observe the clear signs of true
love. As Krafft-Ebing reported.

[69]

Strangers

Many even lack awareness that their condition is an illness. Most
Urnings feel happy in their perverse sexual feeling and drive, and
unhappy only insofar as social and legal constraints prevent them from
achieving satisfaction.

Often, ‘illness’ was more heartily desired than health: ‘I seek no
remedy for this sickness of my constitution, for I owe it far too many
unforgettably sweet moments’ (Krafft-Ebing, case 144). An English
‘high society’ correspondent of

Dr Saint-Paul suggested that the

higher incidence of nervous complaints in ‘uranists’ was due to

nothing more than the fact that laws and prejudice prevented them

from ‘satisfying their sexual or genital leanings in a simple and easy
fashion’.

Even in the furiously moralizing mind of Ambroise Tardieu, the
relentless inspector of penises, a window of sympathetic recognition
briefly opened:
I have often had occasion to read the correspondence of self-confessed

pederasts,

and have found, couched in the most passionate forms of

language, epithets and images borrowed from the most ardent transports of true love.

The idea that homosexuality might be a form of love, and that a
desire to propagate the species was not the root of all romance, had

been expressed in some serious studies of Greek love (Ramdohr’s
Venus Urania in 1787; Hossli’s Eros in 1836), in the novels of Balzac

and

in

Hubert Lauvergne’s study of lovesick convicts: hes Formats

consideres sous le rapport physiologiqiie, moral et intellectuel (1841).

A great

deal of time and ingenuity could have been saved if doctors had read

more widely or trusted their patients.
Even so, the medical discovery of homosexual normality was much
earlier and less controversial than might be supposed.

When Evelyn

Hooker showed in 1957 that there was no difference between the
psychological profiles of gay and straight people, her findings pro-

voked more professional outrage than they would have done seventy
A medical encyclopedia published in Leipzig and Vienna

years before.

in 1885 insisted that ‘aberrations of the sexual feeling appear not

only in the case of nervous and mental illness, but also in individuals
for

whom neither any kind of disturbance of the psychic functions

Country of the Blind
nor any anomaly in the nerve centre may be demonstrated’. Sexual
‘aberrations’, it said, were more frequent in sane people.

The need to distinguish between perversity (vice) and perversion
(an instinctive, congenital state) was a

commonplace of late- 19th-

century psychiatry. In 1885, Enrico Morselli, professor of psychiatry
at Turin from 1889, went so far as to group perversion and perversity

under the term ‘omosessualismo’, reserving the term ‘uranismo’ for
homosexuality, ‘that truly extraordinary phenomenon of the sexual
psyche’.

In a famous article on ‘Inversion du sens genital’ in the Archives de

Magnan and Jean Charcot described a
sociable, kind and erudite man of thirty-one with a big moustache
and a military bearing who had become a University professor at the

neurologic in 1882, Valentin

age of thirty. Apart from fluttering eyelashes, the occasional

^crise

and a helpless attraction to men, he appeared strangely

hysterique'

sane:

One would certainly not make oneself popular if one told his listeners
that the distinguished professor whose eloquence, logic and judgment

they admire every day was in reality a sick man whose brain is tor-

mented by the strangest ideas and who may, from one moment to the
next, be compelled in spite of himself to behave in the most shamefully

promiscuous fashion.

For the

first

appeared in the

time in history, real scenes of forbidden passion
clinical

environment of forensic textbooks. Albert

Moll described ‘Uranists weeping with despair

in

my consulting

room’. Paul Gamier, in La Folk a Paris (1890), espoused the theory

of ‘mental degeneration’, but the notes of his ‘pederast’ sounded for
all

the world like the cries of any passionate lover: ‘Oh, dear sad

memories! How I used to kiss that beautiful body, that pretty face
without a wrinkle, that sweet mouth that asked to be kissed, those
lovely eyes I used to worship
nelle in

1894,

.

.

.’

In the Archives d^anthropologic crimi-

Marc-Andre Raffalovich made the astonishing claim

that ‘one can, without much risk (or even any risk at all), make friends

with a congenital invert’.

There were even hints
bestiality,

that,

far

from being

a

close cousin of

homosexual passion might betoken a kind of superiority.

[71]

Strangers
In his study of La Folk erotique (1888), Benjamin Ball, who held the
first

chair of psychiatry in France, contended that ‘sexual perversion

can coexist with a perfectly normal mental state and even with the

most brilliant intellectual faculties’. Lists of eminent homosexuals Shakespeare, Michelangelo, Byron, etc. - were already a common
form of self-affirmation in homosexual circles. With Albert Moll’s
sensitive study of 1891, these

lists

began to acquire some scientific

respectability.

The implication was that a cure might be the mental equivalent of
amputating a healthy limb. Some patients seemed to need nothing
but encouragement to regain their health. i\s one of Krafft-Ebing’s
early patients exclaimed: ‘Ever since I gave free rein to

my Uranian

nature, I have been happier, healthier and more productive!’

This is where the eventual importance of VV^estphal’s 1870 article on
‘contrary sexual feeling’ and its possible treatment becomes ominously

apparent. Westphal had presented himself as the investigator of a

phenomenon that had been ‘described little or not at all’, but his
notion of ‘innate inversion [Ve7'kehriing\ of sexual feeling’ was neither

new nor particularly convincing. The article was based on two cases:
a man masquerading as a countess who earned a living by theft,
and a woman suffering from violent rage and a desire to have sex
with women. The man might have had a ‘morbid desire’ to dress as
a woman, as Westphal asserted, but he also had a professional reason

for doing so. Transvestite disguise

was

a

common criminal ploy.

(The French and German laws against transvestism were aimed at
criminals, not at sexual deviants.) There was no sign that he had ever

been sexually attracted by men. The woman, as Westphal acknowledged, seemed perfectly normal. She was worried about spending two

months in a lunatic asylum and later befriended one of the more
pathetic inmates, not because she wanted sex, but because she felt
sorry for her.

The description of homosexuality as a neuropathic state was hardly
a great advance. The real significance of Westphal was that he gave
long and detailed accounts, with direct quotations, then showed how
homosexuality could be saved for the medical profession. He stamped
it

with psychiatric authority and made it sound like a treatable con-

dition. In fact, Westphal had been inspired partly by the recent legal

[72]

Country of the Blind
debate in Germany. If the- law was repealed and ‘contrary sexuals’

were no longer sent to prison, doctors, ‘in whose domain they belong’,

would receive more and more such patients. It was important therefore to prepare for the rush and to make sure that they knocked at
the right door.

Westphal was well equipped to become a ‘pioneer’. Unlike Ulrichs,
he was not a homosexual and so could not be accused of ‘special
pleading’.

He knew how to make the most of small quantities of

information, and he edited the Archiv fur Psychiatric und Nervenkrankheiten.

This was

his

real

contribution.

In

the

long term,

Westphal made it easier for doctors who were not simply performing
their forensic,

hygienic duty to talk about the shameful subject

without risking their reputations.

The only problem now was to show that all cases - even the
healthy, happy ones - fell under the doctor’s jurisdiction. The military

doctor Julien Chevalier coined the oxymoron ‘lucid psychopaths’,

which at least assigned that anomalous creature, ‘the born invert’, to
a branch of the pathological tree.

Not surprisingly, even in apparently

sane inverts, symptoms of degeneration could always be found, if only

an asymmetrical face, a jutting jaw, big ears or a tapering penis.

From now on, there would be a witch-ducking logic about the
treatment of homosexuals. If mentally ill, the subject was not responsible and should be locked away. If, on the other hand, there were no

signs of illness, then the person was a healthy invert and thus a simple

debauchee who should be punished. As Dr Chevalier decreed in 1893,

‘No half measures: either chastise or sequester'

Many doctors who tried to develop a cure for homosexuality
were inspired by the idea that a bridge could be built between abnormality and normality. For example, a man who was attracted to boys

could be encouraged to fall in love with boyish women. In a novella

by Heinz Tovote, Erldst (1895), a homosexual man is introduced by
his doctor to

follows, the
first child,

an angelic gargon manque with short hair. Marriage

man becomes increasingly heterosexual and, after the

the wife is told that she can now safely grow her hair.

Dr Saint-Paul wondered in 1 896 whether this treatment might not

[73]

St'RANGERS
be used to cure a male homosexual and a lesbian at the same time.

The lesbian would become enamoured with the womanly man, and
the man with the manly woman. He also suggested that an invert,
placed in an exclusively female environment, might invert himself a

second time and become normal, as it were, by a process of ‘double
inversion’.

"

The ‘bridge’ idea was based on an assumption that heterosexuality
would naturally reassert itself like a stream that had been dammed or
diverted.

Abraham

Brill,

a

psychiatrist

at

Columbia

University,

reported in 1913 that some doctors ‘invariably resort to bladder

washing and rectal massage when they are consulted by homosexuals’.
According to one doctor, the idea was to kill the homosexual cells so
that normal cells could take their place.

This ‘Nature will out’ view was also held by doctors who had no
interest in developing elaborate procedures. The advice reported by

one of the interviewees in Gordon Westwood’s Report on the Life of
the Male Homosexual in Great Britain (1958) is typical of most medical

prescriptions for at least a century and a half: ‘He told me to pull up

my socks, find myself a nice girl and get married.’
Even the ingenious Dr Brouardel, who made a study of (illusory)
sex changes in the corpses of boy prostitutes, favoured a simple,
practical approach. When Andre Gide consulted him shortly before
becoming engaged to Madeleine Rondeaux in 1895, he was told not
to make a fuss:
Get married and don’t worry. You’ll soon see that it’s all in your
imagination. You’re like a starving man who has been trying to feed

himself on nothing but gherkins.

[.

.

.]

Once you’re married, you’ll

understand in no time at all what natural instinct is.

These doctors who so breezily sacrificed the happiness of women
to their male patients’ sexual and moral health looked no further
than the genitals. The great thing was to achieve intercourse and
to procreate. Social responsibility was

more important than sexual

fulfilment. The proper repository for sperm was a wife - the passive

piggy-bank that would eventually pay dividends in the form of a son

and heir. This seemed particularly urgent in France after the defeat
by Prussia in 1870. The population was growing too slowly, and

[74]

Country of the Blind
almost a third of all conscripts were judged too puny to fight. (An

even greater preponderance of male weediness was discovered in
Britain at the time of the Boer War.) Practitioners of ‘unnatural vice’

were obvious scapegoats. In 1871, Ambroise Tardieu came up with
the idea of a fiscal cure: a tax on bachelors and childless widows under
thirty.

Some doctors went a step further and tried to kick-start the ‘natural
instinct’. Albert Moll, who lost his youthful common sense, used
literary descriptions of boudoirs and harems, and pictures of ‘lightly-

clad female persons’. Baron Albert von Schrenck-Notzing, a Munich
psychiatrist with boundless powers of self-persuasion, prescribed fre-

quent visits to the brothel, preceded by large doses of alcohol. The
idea was that an experienced prostitute would know how to generate

the correct response, even in a nervous, drunken invert. (Female
patients

were referred only to their husbands.) The patient would

then be able to marry, have children and, of course, pass on any
venereal infections picked up during the treatment.

same sordid cure on a
Belgian law professor, as he boasted to his literary friends, Daudet
Freud’s teacher, Jean Charcot, used the

and Goncourt. The man had emerged from the brothel crying, ‘I can

do it! I can do it!’ If true, this was extremely unusual. Albert Moll,

who described the brothel cure as a training in debauchery and a
source of continually renewed despair, knew a patient who fled in
horror just as the woman was removing her clothes. Claude Hartland
claimed to prefer the dentist’s chair.
It should be said that brothel therapy, like most other

19th-century

cures, was not invented by the medical profession. Along with absti-

nence and suicide, it was one of the commonest self-applied remedies.
Naturally, these dismal experiments were worse than futile. After his
release from prison,

Oscar Wilde was persuaded by Ernest Dowson

to visit a prostitute in Dieppe in order to acquire ‘a more wholesome
taste’.

When he emerged from the brothel, a small crowd, supposedly,

had gathered in the street. He whispered to Dowson, ‘The first these
ten years, and it shall be the last. It was like chewing cold mutton!’
Then, in a louder voice: ‘But tell it in England, for it will entirely
restore my character!’

A slightly more subtle form of therapy involved the use of hypnosis.
[75]

Strangers
Even the pragmatic Krafft-Ebing saw hypnosis as the best hope,
though he considered it to be little more than ‘dressage’ and used it
mainly to express sympathy:

When a contrary-sexual demands treatment on ethical, social or other
grounds, it should not be refused. It is the doctor’s sacred duty to give

whatever help and advice he can to those who seek it. The client’s
health should always come before the well-being of society as a whole.

In practice, he felt that the only real success consisted in rendering
the patient ‘sexually neutral’ (i.e. sexually neutralized).

The bleak suggestions made to patients under hypnosis bring to
mind the ‘cure’ devised by well-meaning doctors for the sighted
man in H. G. Wells’s The Country of the Blind. A young businessman
treated by Krafft-Ebing was made to repeat depressingly prophylactic
sentences like this: ‘I abhor love of my own sex and will no longer
find any man beautiful.’ The following series of suggestions was made
to a twenty-nine-year-old bachelor in December 1888:
1.

I

2

I

.

abhor onanism, for it makes me sick and miserable.
am no longer attracted to men, for loving men is against religion.

Nature and the law.
3.

I

am attracted to women, for women are lovely and desirable and

created for man.

This particular case was described as a ‘success’. After four sessions,
‘the patient even asked for the address of a brothel’.

A year and a half

when Krafft-Ebing met him on a journey, he was copulating
happily and ‘thinking seriously of marriage’. Dr Bernheim of Nancy

later,

contented himself with programming his patient, a travelling sales-

man, to have ‘spontaneous

erections’

on nights when he would

share a bed with his wife.

These hypnotic cures sometimes lasted several years and more
than 100 sessions. They were the Victorian equivalent of long-term,
voluntary psychoanalysis. Their apparent popularity is understandable: the prize

of normality was always just out of reach, and the

length, cost and futility of the treatment gave patients a good reason
to feign success.

Ereud himself believed that some people had been

Country of the Blind
The idea that homosexuals were constitutional
when they claimed to be cured.
Hypnosis was also tremendously flattering to the doctor. The charismatic American Dr Quackenbos claimed in 1899 to have cured
cured by hypnosis.

liars was usually set aside

his patients of various complaints including kleptomania, tobacco

addiction, dishonesty and homosexuality. An employee of ‘one of our

great insurance companies’ was restored to an appearance of nor-

mality by being made to associate ‘unnatural lust’ with ‘moral, mental

and financial ruin’. ‘Would I dare to soil a soul so completely at my

mercy with a single untoward thought?’ Dr Quackenbos wondered
with barely concealed megalomania. His hypnotic red carnelian on a
gold pencil turned him into ‘the vice-regent of the Almighty’.

Compared

to

later

refinements,

this

was mere showmanship.

Psychoanalysis was more insidious and just as ineffective. Instead of

simply curbing his sexual desires, the patient would be sent on a wild

goose chase inside his own mind, in search of domineering mothers,
feeble

fathers

and

masochistic

tendencies.

Psychoanalysis

gave

common prejudice a much larger repertoire of disguises, and the
patient could always be blamed for the doctor’s failure. As Edmund

Bergler decreed in The Counterfeit Sex (1958): ‘There are no happy

homosexuals; and there would not be, even if the outer world left

them in peace.’ ‘The reason is an internal one. Unconsciously they
want to be disappointed.’
*

Hypnosis was one of the cures that seemed to be dying a natural
death when it was revived in the early 20th century and plugged in
to the ever- expanding grid of technological innovation.

The homosexual became a walking laboratory. The cure was no
longer an attempt to heal, it was a means of testing medical theories

and procedures. Or rather, the doctor’s expertise determined his view
of homosexuality. Alienists experienced in the use of hydrotherapy and
anaphrodisiacs believed that homosexuals were sexually overcharged.

Doctors who liked to lecture their patients on morality adduced moral
weakness: in 1894, Dr Kiernan of Chicago, when treating a lesbian,

found that ‘sympathy’ had a ‘poisonous’ effect - ‘there is entirely too

much sympathy wasted on these patients, since sympathy to them is

[77]

Strangers
as

poisonous as to the hysteric whose mental state is very similar’.

Hypnotists naturally refused to believe that homosexuality was innate.
If the condition turned out to be congenital, suggestion therapy would

be largely redundant. This is why Dr Schrenck-Notzing described
the idea that homosexuality was not an illness as ‘therapeutic nihilism’.

The idea that medical views of homosexuality were determined by
the available treatments and technology is not particularly interesting

from a theoretical point of view, but it does account for the increasing
ingenuity brought to bear on the matter. In the 1930s, in Europe

and America, brutal aversion therapies were applied with increasing
indifference to failure. In 1935, Dr Louis Max induced vomiting while

showing pictures of naked men. After an injection of testosterone, the
naked men were replaced with naked women. Similar therapies were
still

routinely used in Australia in the 1960s.

The modest pharmaceutical procedures of the

19th century -

bromide of potassium prescribed for masturbating boys and women
who were thought to have been stimulated by excessive use of sewingmachines; morphine, camphor and strychnine, or simply a spartan
diet

- gave way to radiation and hormone treatments (from the

1930s). Electrical therapy or ‘faradization’ had been used for various

complaints since the 1830s, but most 19th-century doctors were
sceptical. Later, it was used quite freely.

Surgical cures also became more popular. Early interest had been
shown in the United States. In 1889, Dr Erank Lydston suggested

removing the ovaries or the clitoris of sexual deviants. He also cited
a

doctor who repeatedly cauterized the back of the patient’s neck,

‘basing this treatment upon the theory that the disease takes its origin
in over-excitation of the nerve fibres of the cerebellum or some of

the ganglia in the neighborhood’. In 1893, Dr E E. Daniel of Austin,

Texas recommended castration as a humane alternative to death: ‘We
are warranted in at least

making the experiment on a scale large

enough to test the operation as a therapeutic measure.’ By 1917, Dr
Lydston was a champion of sterilization: ^No sexual pe'ruert should be
allowed to procreate'

These brutal treatments sometimes met with public opposition,
but other surgical cures were widely applied: trepanning (from the
1890s), testicle transplants (early 20th century), lobotomy (mainly in

[78]

Country of the Blind
the United States in the 1940s). The cure, increasingly, was a con-

version process that turned the victim into a textbook case.

The

cure did not remove the complaint; it endowed the patient with the

abnormality from which he was supposed to be suffering. The mathematician Alan Turing, after his arrest in Manchester in 1952, was
given oestrogen injections to reduce his libido. As a result, he began

grow breasts. Before the treatment, Turing was a normal person
who fell in love with other men. After the treatment, he looked more
to

like the

androgynous freak that the police had imagined they were

arresting.

He committed suicide in 1954.

This dismal state of affairs should not be seen as the inevitable
result of the medical discovery of homosexuality. Real progress did

occur. In the thirty-eight years between Casper’s Practisches Handbuch

(1858) and Ellis’s Sexual Inversion (1896), many myths were exploded:

homosexual

men could be virile and lesbians could be womanly;

passive and active roles were fluid and the ‘passive’ partner was not

always the more effeminate; transvestism and the act of sodomy were
more common among heterosexuals; most surprising of all, contrary
sexuals, Uranians and inverts could lead happy, fulfilling lives.

The long-term effects of these Victorian explorations should also
be seen in more cheerful developments. In the 19th century, selfloathing was the

first

sign that the homosexual might be cured.

Since 1973, ‘ego-dystonic homosexuality’ - a frantic, futile desire to

be heterosexual a disorder in the

is

the only category of homosexuality listed as

American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and

Manual of Mental Disorders. (Naturally, the removal of
homosexuality from the manual met with fierce opposition. It has
Statistical

since crept back in as ‘Gender Identity Disorder’ or ‘Deficit’.) This

enlightened non-interference has its roots in the 19th century - in

Magnus
make sure that the patient is

Krafft-Ebing’s advice to avoid excessive abstinence, or in
Hirschfeld’s ‘adaptive therapy’ (1913):

homosexual; explain that homosexuality is a misfortune only because
of social pressure; counteract the sense of isolation by telling the
patient about eminent homosexuals in history and the present; stop
all

medical treatments and introduce the patient to other

homo-

sexuals.

When Ereud wrote to an American woman who was troubled by

[79]

Strangers
her son’s homosexuality in April 1935, he was writing as a student of

19th-century medicine. The insulting theory of arrested development

came from the \^ctorian age, but so did the pragmatism and the
humanity:
Homosexuality

is assuredly no advantage, but it is nothing to be
ashamed of, no vice, no degradation, it cannot be classified as an illness;

we consider it to be a variation of the sexual function produced by a
certain arrest of sexual development.

Many highly respectable indi-

viduals of ancient and modern times have been homosexuals, several

of the greatest men among them (Plato, Michelangelo, Leonardo da
Vinci, etc.). It is a great injustice to persecute homosexuality as a crime,

and cruelty too.
*

This chapter inevitably

paints a

somewhat grisly picture of

homosexuality in the surgery, and so it seems a good idea to end with
an example of what medical science could achieve when it allowed
first-hand experience to threaten its disciplinary integrity.

Albert Moll’s Die

conti'Ure

Sexualempfindiing (1891), written and

published before he was thirty, was a summing up and sweeping out

of the ‘knowledge’ amassed by the fledgling discipline. It may well

be the first major work on homosexuality produced by a homosexual

from within the medical establishment. Moll never married and he
had unusually good access to first-hand information. His book was
based on hundreds of interviews with Berlin ‘uranists’ and on the

testimony of the sympathetic Head of the German Pederasty Division. It says a lot

about the tenacity of prejudice that its findings

might still seem extraordinary to some people, 112 years after its
publication.

Homosexuality, in Moll’s view, was not ‘picked up’ like a vice or a
habit. It

appeared in early childhood and was probably congenital.

All the supposed ‘causes’ were imaginary. Masturbation had nothing

to do with it, nor did sexual excess. By the same reasoning, overactive

homosexuals would turn themselves into heterosexuals: ‘One is no

more likely to see an individual glutted with cakes and pastries develop
a sudden taste for the filth and rubbish in the street.’

Unusually for a doctor whose cases were predominantly criminal.

[8o]

Country of the Blind
Moll claimed that homosexuality was not the mark of a bad character.

Homosexuals were not particularly prone to mistreating or killing
one another. Paedophiles were just as likely to be heterosexual.
Homosexuality was found in all times and places and there were no
racial variations.

As many Jews as Gentiles were homosexual. (Moll

himself was a Protestant of Jewish descent.) Its incidence - especially
in women - was greatly underestimated.

Moll did claim to find some inherent traits - hysteria, gossiping,
effeminate gestures - and he threw in the occasional ‘repulsive’,
but he rejected the more spectacular suppositions. There was no

connection between physical hermaphrodism and sexual inversion.

Hairy women were not predisposed to tribadism, and homosexual
penises did not point in a different direction from those of other

men. Smoking was just as common among male homosexuals, and
the range of whistling ability was the same.
Instant recognition was also a myth, though

many homosexuals

believed it. Moll had interviewed two Berlin uranists independently:

though they both believed in an instinctive ability to recognize men
like themselves, neither knew that the other was homosexual. Apparently,

when they were shown photographs, they tended to associate

a sidelong glance with homosexuality. As for Mantegazza’s theory that

the genital nerves of homosexuals ended at the anus, Moll pointed

out that one would have to conclude that men who received sexual
stimulus from their toes or forehead had penile nerves in their feet

or face.

‘

Homosexuality was a cause of suffering but not a disease. The
unhappiness of homosexuals was caused by society. Many passions
lasted a lifetime,

and if liaisons were often brief, it was not because

homosexuals were promiscuous but because they were not bound by
the social conventions of family and marriage.

Perhaps the most radical aspect of Moll’s study was the definition
of homosexuality as a naturally occurring variety of human sexuality.
The ‘unnatural’ argument was specious: ‘Man generally performs the
sexual act with

woman, not with the conscious aim of producing

children, but to satisfy an irresistible urge.’

A homosexual who had

sex with another homosexual was performing a natural act.

[8i]

Strangers
Over half a century before the Kinsey Report, Moll replaced the
quasi-ethnic division of humanity into hetero- and homo-sexual with
the notion of a sexual continuum:

One can easily see that sexual inversion is not isolated from normal
sexual

life

by an unbridgeable gulf In

bisexuality,

in

as

all

other

domains, one finds intermediate cases ranging from a mere trace of

homosexual love to the most pronounced uranism.

The

practical

conclusions were

obvious.

The

law should be

changed, and ‘cures’ should be abandoned. Illnesses suffered by

homosexuals were caused, not by mental or physical abnormality,
but by fear, guilt and sexual deprivation. ‘Since abstinence has been

proved to aggravate the morbid

state

we can only

of uranists,

encourage them to indulge in homosexual acts.’

This remarkable book was written by a young man who was sufficiently

confident,

discipline to

commonsensical and witty to undermine the

which he owed

his reputation

and

his salary. If his

conclusions were adopted, medical categories would be seen to be

more than metaphors. The whole field would be shattered into
individual cases: ‘To make a complete study [of sexual perversions,
little

heterosexual and homosexual], one would have to [.

.

.]

take account

of the individual features of each invalid and the peculiarities of his
perversion.’ Nevertheless, his work was read and admired not just by

outsiders like Ellis and Carpenter but also by other doctors.
Sadly,

Moll fell prey to his own profession. He came to believe

that cures were possible after all and insisted that homosexuals should

obtain a medical opinion before pronouncing themselves sane. Like

most of his colleagues, he found that reasons to change his mind

became increasingly scarce. He became obsessed with professional
rivalries. He and Freud made a show of despising one another, perhaps
because they owed so much to each other’s work. In 1913, Moll
helped to found the International Society for Sex Research as a rival
to Hirschfeld’s Medical Society for Sexology. He wanted to ‘open the

eyes of educated people to the dangers of homosexual agitation’. In

such belligerent circumstances, partisan theories were always likely
to prevail.

[82]

Country of the Blind
Albert Moll died on the same day as Sigmund Freud (23 September
1939). By then, from Nazi Germany to the United States, the theoretical

view of homosexuality had become a hereditary perversion of

the medical profession.

[83]

4
Outings

On one of those foggy nights when sounds are strangely
lugubrious, I heard the cries of distress of a man who was

being beaten up and,

it

seemed, butchered.

I

have since

learned what this strange drama was about, but I neither

can nor will say what it was.

George Sand, Histoire de ma vie (IV, 9),
apparendy associating the incident with
the Marquis de Custine (see p. 87)

One evening after we had lived together a month, I returned
from work to find my apartment in the condition in which
burglars

would have

left

it,

locked closets and drawers

broken open, and their contents scattered around. [.

.

.]

The following evening I was amazed at learning that the
manuscript of this autobiography had been returned by
parcels post.

The package had been inadvertently opened

by my landlord, and

therefore decided to confess

my

androgynism. Moreover, on account of the expected

call

I

from criminally-minded blackmailers, it was desirable to
appeal to

him for protection. His marvellous and hardly

expected sympathy greatly relieved my distress. I proposed
vacating his house, but he would not hear of it.
Earl Lind, Autobiography of an Androgyne,

1900; published 1918

[84]

Outings
N THE PREVIOUS TWO CHAPTERS, Uranians, inverts and homo-

I sexuals have been seen

in

exceptional

- and exceptionally

unpleasant - circumstances. In this chapter, the institutional doors
are thrown open onto the bigger institution outside.

Any description of the relations of gay men and women with the
rest of society relies on generalization. Some communities and periods
were more tolerant than others; some people were eventually quite

happy to be

‘outed’, others suffered lifelong humiliation. Yet the

similarities are just as striking and significant as the differences. This

would not have surprised the thousands of men and women who
found groups of like-minded strangers in other countries and social
classes, or who recognized their plight and passion in books and
paintings from a distant age.

The first part of this chapter is devoted largely to well-known
middle- or upper-class people who had special claims to the public’s
attention. This is partly because the evidence is more copious, but it
also provides a basis for understanding the experience of less extra-

ordinary people. The widely reported misadventures and triumphs of

prominent homosexuals helped to shape the self-image and social
identity of people who were otherwise alone and adrift.

The lives of men and women who belong to an unorganized
minority are often representative to an unusual degree, however
various the individuals.

A homosexual French aristocrat, for instance, whose father and
grandfather were guillotined in the Revolution, who grew up in a

medieval castle in Brittany, whose mother was Chateaubriand’s mistress

and who v/rote one of the finest travel books of the Romantic

period (La Russie en 1839), can hardly be described as typical. But

even the life of Astolphe de Custine could give shivers of recognition
to people who belonged to very different worlds.

In 1818, unaware that some people referred to the sensitive young

marquis as ‘Mile de Chateaubriand’, the Duchesse de Duras set her

on Astolphe as a husband for her daughter Clara. Astolphe’s
mother knew about his inclinations but saw no reason to prevent the

sights

marriage. Her son must have an heir.

[85]

Strangers
At

first,

Astolphe seemed to show interest but then withdrew,

pleading some mysterious impediment. In public, he wrapped himself

He was suffering from an indefinable
malady of the soul: ‘Ever since I came into this world, my heart has

in a fashionable Romantic cloak.

been an enigma that no other heart has solved [.

.

.]

and that I myself

am less able to explain than anyone else.’ ‘Sitting on the ruins of
my life, I stare insensibly at the torrent that bears me off with my
shattered hopes.’

It

was perfectly possible to talk like this in 1818

without arousing suspicions.

Word went round that the mysterious problem was impotence.
Custine’s prospective mother-in-law expressed her worries by writing
a

puzzling novel,

Olivier^

ou

le

Secret (1822), in

which a shrinking

violet called Olivier oddly refuses to marry the perfect woman. Even

now, Olivier’s ‘bizarre secret’ is sometimes said to be impotence. But

when Olivier complains that ‘the only feelings of which my heart is
capable are those that honour forbids’, is he really referring to genital

malfunction?
Olivier is a parlour game in which the truth emerges by a process

of elimination: the only theory left standing at the end is the unmentionable one.

The Duchesse de Duras was not a novice. She was

obviously intrigued by her daughter’s reluctant suitor, and the result

of her analysis was the first sympathetic novel in modern literature

about a homosexual man. Of course, sympathy had to be disguised

something else. At the end of the novel, Olivier blows his brains
out and his fiancee goes mad. But this is the death of an innocent
as

tragic hero, not the comeuppance of a pervert.

Custine’s friend Rahel Varnhagen von Ense also guessed the truth:

‘Eew people’, she told him, ‘truly know the needs of their own nature,
even those of their physical nature.’ Women, too, were likely to be
judged either sexless or depraved and were often better able to understand the predicament. Custine’s closest male friend, Edouard de La

Grange, was completely mystified and spent the next two years trying
to find out what was wrong:

nature?’ he asked his diary.

this

‘Is

‘Is it

misfortune the misfortune of

the fault of misdirected leanings?

Oh my friend, how you hurt me, and how guilty I feel to have such
thoughts!’

Like most people in his position, Custine suffered more from the

[

86 ]

Outings
need to deceive his friends than from fear of discovery. Deception

was a form of mental suicide. In his unsigned novel Aloys (1829),
without specifying the source of his anguish, he gave one of the first
psychological analyses of life in the closet. This was something more
insidious than social inconvenience.

The undiscovered homosexual

was an exile in his own land, an invisible man who was also blind to
his surroundings:

As long as we speak only in response to other people’s disapproving
silence, and as long as our words are but an apology, we ourselves are

unable to judge the world fairly. Our life is an enigma to others, but
their lives are an enigma to us, and our attempts to communicate with

them are futile: we see them always as an audience, and in their eyes
we are actors. No mind or character can withstand such false relations.
They affect not only our behaviour but also our most intimate feelings.
In 1823, Custine suddenly seemed to solve his problem. His mother

gave him an innocent orphan to marry. A son was born - thus ruining
the ‘impotence’ excuse - but died a few years later. At about the same
time, Custine found a new friend in the homosexual underworld of
Paris:

Edward Sainte-Barbe.

the son of an English judge called

Edward, Astolphe and his wife Leontine formed an amicable menage
a trois. Edward nursed Leontine through her final illness. She died in

July 1823.
Just when the ‘ruins’ of his life were beginning to look habitable,
Custine’s secret was brutally revealed. In

newspapers reported that a ‘Marquis de C

November 1824, several
.

.

.’

had been beaten up

by some soldiers on the road to Saint-Denis. The Prefect of Police

wanted to reassure people that the streets were safe and made sure
that details leaked out. Custine had had an assignation with a young
soldier. The soldier’s comrades had decided to ‘teach him a lesson’.
They shaved Custine’s head, tore off his clothes and left him to make
his way back to Paris in the rain. This lynching had the savage,
ritualistic features of what would later be called ‘queer-bashing’. The

soldiers had taken a stone and smashed his hand in order to remove
his wedding-ring.

Custine’s friends were appalled, but not by the violence. One of
them saw the incident as a sign of the times: ‘My God, what a sordid

[87]

Strangers
combination of Romanticism, mysticism and Germanism!’ Even La

Grange was battered into recognition: ‘The man is sunk, sullied,
branded with the mark of reprobation.’ To think that ‘every mother

wanted him as a son-in-law!’.

The not entirely regrettable result was that Custine was ostracized
by the snobs of the Faubourg Saint-Germain and spent more time

He shared his house at Ferv^aques with Sainte-Barbe

travelling.

and sometimes with other friends like the German historian F. C.
Schlosser

(‘a

stranger to everything but

Greek and

philosophy’).

Disgrace washed off quite easily. Custine entertained lavishly, corres-

ponded widely and was admired by some of the greatest writers of
the age, including Balzac, Stendhal and Baudelaire.

The brutal outing of the Marquis de Custine was a kind of liberation.

Everyone knew his secret, he was able to live an honest life

with his lovers, and since most of the pedants and prudes had been
driven away, the quality of his social life improved enormously. His
heterosexual guests might have twittered about his ‘black depths’ and
his ‘limp

and sticky^ hand’, but they enjoyed his hospitality and his

conversation.

Now that their diaries and letters have been published,

Custine ’s world looks forbiddingly homophobic, but daily reality was
different, even in the nervous, sectarian world of Restoration France.

The rewards of Custine’s company outweighed the pleasures of condemnation. In the end, sexuality mattered less than gender. A woman
who had suffered sexual disgrace and who continued to live with
more than one lover would have found the road back to respectability
impossibly long and stony.
*

It is unlikely that French society invented a special response just

Other homosexual households were already known to
exist. Of course, the fact that they were famous marks them out from
for Custine.

the crowd.

They were more vulnerable to common prejudice, but

they also had the financial and intellectual means to counteract it.

Their voices could be heard. Joseph Fievee, who served Napoleon as
a secret agent in London and Paris, lived quite openly with his friend,
the playwright

Theodore Leclercq. The two men had lived as a

couple in England, Germany and in Fievee’s official residence when

[

88 ]

Outings
he was Prefect of the Nievre. Far from being ostracized, they were a
very popular couple. They staged Leclercq’s satirical playlets at their

home in front of large and appreciative audiences. When he died in
1851, Leclercq was buried next to his friend in the Pere-Lachaise

cemetery. As Fievee pointed out, ‘Any friendship that lasts more than
thirty years eventually becomes respectable.’

Naturally, acceptance was not absolute. The words ‘tolerance’ and
‘acceptance’, used throughout this chapter, should be taken in a

severely restricted sense. Fievee’s remark suggests a long apprenticeship in respectability. ‘Model’ couples were contrasted, as they are
today, with the unacceptable ‘promiscuous’ variety.

The art critic

Delecluze reported the gossip after a performance at Fievee’s home
in 1826:

They were barely in the street when everyone started talking about
the male household of Fievee and Leclercq.
One of the gentlemen
[.

.

.]

spoke about the air of decency that reigns chez Fievee and compared
it

with the liaison of the improwisatore Sgricci with his young sten-

ographer. The difference between Leclercq and Antonio, he said,

is

the same as the difference between a lawful wife and a mistress. Fievee

has found a way to make it almost respectable!

Tommaso Sgricci himself may have been more disreputable but
he enjoyed a similar degree of tolerance, at least in Italy, where his
genius for improvising poems on any subject made him a national
hero.

Byron wrote to John Hobhouse from Ravenna on 3 March

1820:
Sgricci is here improvising with great success - he is also a celebrated

Sodomite, a character by no means so much respected in Italy as it
should be; but they laugh instead of burning - and the Women talk of
it

as a pity in a man of talent - but with greater tolerance than could

be expected - and only express their hopes that he may yet be converted
to Adultery.

Sgricci was publicly teased for his sexual tastes but he could respond

to the jibes quite safely. In Florence, he
surveillance. Spies

was placed under police

saw him standing at his window in the Via dei

Bardi, pretending to write poems and flirting with boys and soldiers

[89]

Strangers
in the street. The protection of the

Grand Duke of Tuscany might

have saved him from prosecution, but his behaviour seems to have

been accepted in any case. According to the Inspector of Police,
Sgricci would leave the house at dusk, dressed for pleasure: ostentatious coiffure,

open-necked

shirt,

‘almost skimpy and artificially

tight-fitting clothes designed to show off the hips as much as possible’.

(This had been a recognizably homosexual style of dress for several
centuries.)

‘And with an affected gait, he goes walking through the

city in search of adventures in the manner of a lady of the night.’

Acceptance was clearly not the result of naivety. Custine’s mishap
on the road to Saint-Denis left no one in doubt about his private life,

and even Fievee’s decent liaison was widely thought to be sexual, as
various smutty epigrams suggest:

Des soins divejs, mais assidus

De Fie've'e occupent la vie;

Comme B[ougre] il salit les cus^
Comme ecrivain il les essuie. *
Even people who were not visibly monogamous, like Sgricci or the
French painter Girodet, could be seen as sexual oddities without fatal

damage to their reputation. Girodet’s paintings, especially the dreamy
Sleep of Endymion (1792),
love.

were recognized as icons of homosexual

French novelists used his name to hint at a character’s sexual

proclivity.

Anecdotes were told about his private life: he had appar-

ently been pestered by the actress Julie Candeille, who saw him as

the perfect husband for her declining years. At first Girodet pleaded

impotence, to which she replied, ‘What does that matter at our age!’

Then he claimed to be a ‘bizarre and violent’ man who was in the
habit of beating up his servants: ‘I am capable of every sort of excess!’
This convinced her that she should look elsewhere.^ (She eventually

*

‘Fievee devotes his

life /

To various exacting tasks. / As a B[ugger], he dirties

arses, / And as a writer wipes them.’
^

Beating up servants seems to have been a metaphor for homosexual acts. In an

otherwise baffling episode of Stendhal’s Armafice (1827) - inspired by the Duchesse

de Duras’s Olivier - Octave, a frigid aristocrat ‘with the most beautiful blond curls
in the world’, throws his servant out of the window, then adopts the man, becomes
his ‘servant’ and eventually sends him away with a pension to buy his silence.

[90]

Outings
settled

on a homosexual artist called Hilaire Perie who used to run

about Paris dressed as an Ancient Greek.)

The absence of consistently extreme reactions makes it hard to
a

tell

simple tale of outrage and persecution. There

is

at least as

much evidence of a desire to live and let live as there is of rabid homophobia. Murderous rage was less common than curiosity, curiosity less

common than indifference. Life for men like Custine or Sgricci could
be almost simultaneously traumatic, moderately pleasant and deeply
satisfying. The simple,

inconvenient fact is that different views were

applied at various times to the same person. Later parts of this book

remarks can also be applied to men and
women who had no particular talent for entertaining an audience.
will suggest that similar

Evidence of ordinariness tends to be neglected because it lacks
dramatic interest. The temptation is to fill up the canvas with mass
events - hysterical mobs, purity campaigns, moral panics, and so on.

This tends to reduce people to their sexual desires and to present

them as helpless micro-organisms in the tide of majority opinion. But
they were part of the societies which they helped to form. Like all
social beings, they knew the art of compromise and concealment.
It

could even be said that homosexual men and women revealed

more of themselves than other people and were eagerly invited to
do

so.

As Michel Foucault pointed

out, far

from being censored

and ‘driven back into some dark, inaccessible region’, sex in the 19th
century was increasingly brought into the open. Sex was reincarnated
as the sphinx that could tell the final truth about a human being. The

unmentionability of the ‘nameless sin’ was mentioned all the time.
‘Sodomites’ in these conditions could acquire an almost prophetic

importance: they not only had more secrets to tell, they were also

more likely to know the answers to other people’s secrets.

Foucault’s perception might explain why something like gratitude was shown to sexual strangers. It would also explain why the
two most famous ‘outings’ in European history had such unexpectedly
pleasant results.

Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717-68), whose studies of
Greek art inspired the Classical revival, was commonly thought to

[91]

Strangers
have practised what he preached. As Walter Pater wrote in 1867 with
unusual directness (for him):

That his affinity with Hellenism was not merely intellectual,

[.

.

.]

is

proved by his romantic, fervid friendships with young men. He has

known, he says, many young men more beautiful than Guido’s archangel.

These friendships, bringing him in contact with the pride of

human form, and staining his thoughts with its bloom, perfected his
reconciliation with the spirit of Greek sculpture.

Winckelmann himself insisted that the glories of classical art would
remain

a

mystery to ‘those

who are observant of beauty only in

women, and are moved little or not at all by the beauty of men’.
Casanova claimed to have seen him putting the idea into practice.
Early one morning in Rome, he walked in on a trouserless Winckel-

mann lying on top of a beautiful boy. While pulling up his pants, the
intrepid scholar explained that he was conducting an experiment: he

was trying to enter the minds of his ancient heroes. This may never
have happened (that is, Casanova may never have caught him at it),
but Casanova’s comic anecdote does reflect a common notion that
sex could also be an intellectual adventure. Voltaire is said to have

conducted a similar experiment with an Englishman at the court of
Frederick the Great. A few days later, the Englishman told him that

he had repeated the experiment, to which Voltaire replied: ‘Once, a
philosopher; twice, a sodomite.’*

Eight years later, in 1768, Winckelmann was stabbed and strangled
in a tavern in Trieste by a man called Arcangeli. His scandalous death

was thought to have lifted the veil on his sordid dealings with the

homosexual underworlds of Europe. Arcangeli was an uneducated

man and their liaison had clearly not been intellectual. After reports
in all the

*

European papers, Winckelmann’s propensity was widely

Cf. the more intrepid Flaubert, who paid to be ‘handled’ at the baths in Cairo in

1850: ‘Travelling for our instruction and on a government mission, we considered
ourselves duty-bound to practise that form of ejaculation.’ ‘You ask if I consummated

work begun in the baths. Yes, on a pock-marked young fellow wearing an
enormous white turban. It made me laugh, that’s all. But I’ll do it again. To be
properly carried out, an experiment must be repeated.’
the

Outings
(though not universally) known, and yet his reputation survived and

was even enhanced.
His private letters began to appear shortly after his death and

showed that ‘Greek love’ was not an ancient curio: it was a living
tradition. Winckelmann had been cautious but not obscure:
I

am thinking of going to Naples on the 20th

[.

.

.]

How happy I

should be to have you by my side! You rise with me and you sleep
with me! You are the dream of my night. [...]! kiss your picture and
I

swoon.

From the moment I first saw you, an incomprehensible attraction,
aroused not only by your form and features, gave me an inkling of
that harmony that passes human understanding. [.

.

.]

Love at its stron-

gest mmst express itself in whatever way it can.
I Thee,

both as a man and woman, prize;

For a perfect Love implies

Love in all Capacities.
(Abraham Cowley, ‘Platonick Love’)
Goethe’s edition of these extraordinary love letters appeared in
1805. In the accompanying essay, Winckelmann und sein Jahrhundert^

he portrayed him as ‘a complete man’ whose quest for beauty had been
fuelled by every aspect of his social, intellectual
If the

and emotional life:

demands of friendship and beauty both find sustenance at the

same time in a single object, the man’s happiness and gratitude seem
to exceed all bounds. [.

.

.]

Thus we often find Winckelmann associating

with beautiful young men, and never does he appear more animated

and amiable than in often fleeting moments.

This was not euphemism. Goethe was not hampered by the nonexistence of the word ^Homosexualitdt\ He was describing the precise,
exciting conjugation of desire

predisposition.

and

Winckelmann was

intellect,

a

of circumstance and

hero of the modern mind

and the modern world, and his ‘unnatural’ desires were the clues to
a civilization that had been awaiting rediscovery for over 2,000 years.

Winckelmann ’s sexuality was seen to be central to his influence on
European culture. His writings and admirers helped to establish the
seemingly contradictory ideas that ‘pederasty’ was an intellectually

[93]

Strangers
superior form of passion and that ‘Greek love’ was not essentially
chaste. Carl Justi’s biography (1866-72) talked transparently of ‘parox-

ysms of friendship’ and ‘a natural indifference to the other sex’. By

Dugas wrote his epic study of LAmitie antique
was no longer possible to believe that ‘boy love’ was an

the time Ludovic
(1894),

it

ancient metaphor for intellectual endeavour, as some British scholars

had insisted. The riddle, of course, was as puzzling as ever: ‘How could
these men who had such a keen sense of honour have lost all honour?’
'k

Sixty

after Winckelmann’s

years

death,

another

notorious

‘outing’ of a German writer showed that his case was not unique.

In 1829, the distinguished poet Count von Platen made a snide

reference to Heinrich Heine’s Jewishness in his drama, Der romantische
Odipus. Despite believing Platen to be

‘a

true poet’,

Heine now

decided to destroy his reputation. Like other critics, he had been
startled

by ‘yearnings for pederasty’ in Platen’s latest poems. In his

Reisebilder (vol. 3),

he called him a sexual ostrich who thought that

by simply omitting the word
time, he could hide his

‘'Freund'’ (male friend) from time to
enormous sin. ‘He would have done better

to stick his bottom in the sand.’

No one could possibly have doubted Heine’s meaning. He called
Platen ‘a woman’, ‘a pathic’, ‘a male tribade’, ‘a bottom man’ whose

He used the common
euphemismi for homosexuals: ‘uoarme Briider'’ or ‘ivarme Freunde\* He

love ‘has a passive, Pythagorean quality’.

*

‘Warm brothers’ or ‘warm friends’ had been in use since at least the early 1770s.
‘Warm’ implies affection, though Magnus Hirschfeld traced the expression to the
supposedly higher skin temperature of homosexuals. The anonymous Briefe ilber die
Galanterien vo?i Berlin (1782) shows that the term was not innocently used;
‘Those seven men are warm.’
‘Warm? What does that mean?’

But
‘You’ve spent four months in Berlin and you don’t know that? Amazing!
you must have read something about Socratic love? Well, those men are genuine
[.

.

.]

Socratic lovers.’

‘How lovely!’
‘It

would be if they stopped at spiritual love, but they mix it up with every sort

of carnal love as well.’
‘Impossible!

.’
.

.

[94]

Outings
also suggested that Platen’s

‘Romantic Oedipus’ should have killed

his mother and married his father.

Heine’s vicious attack was not just another tirade against sodomy.
It was one of the first perceptive studies of the ruses of a homosexual

writer ‘living in an age

when he is not allowed to name his true

feelings and when the moral code that opposes his love with unfailing
hostility forbids

him even to express his dismay openly’. ‘His fear

muffles the natural sound of his own voice and condemns him [.

.

.]

to

use the feelings of other poets to mask his own.’ It was practically an
invitation to rediscover Platen’s poetry. Heine had removed the roof

and exposed the fascinating interior - its intricate symbols, its Persian
imitations, its unspeakable secrets. His remarks would have struck a

chord with people who had never written a poem or published a book.
Platen pretended not to have seen the attack, but he was ill in bed
for

two months and spent most of his remaining years

in Italy.

However, there were also two unexpected results. Although Heine
was not the only critic to deplore Platen’s ‘fervent praise of young
boys’ bodies’ (as a reviewer put it in 1829), Heine was widely con-

demned for the attack. His reputation suffered more than Platen’s.

When Platen died in Sicily in 1835 of typhoid, Heine was widely
blamed for his death. The real crime - naming the unnameable - had
been committed, not by Platen but by Heine. Private vice was less
disgraceful than a public breach of etiquette. Even the reviewer who

had criticized the ‘unwomanly’ Platen broke off relations with Heine.

The second surprise is that, like Custine, Platen discovered a new
freedom. Heine had helped his poems to reach their audience and

confirmed the private impressions of many readers. Platen’s technically perfect stanzas now looked like a disciplined expedition into the

wild side of the mind. His sonnets on Venice (1825) had turned
the city into the unreadable map of a homosexual heart:
Dies Labyrinth von Briicken und von Gassen,

Die tausendfach sich ineinanderschlingen,

Wie wird hindurchzugehn mirje gelingen?
Wie werd ich je dies grofie Rdtsel fassen?*
*

‘This labyrinth of bridges and alleyways / That twist around themselves a thou-

sandfold: /

How shall I ever walk that maze / And solve its enormous riddle?’

[95]

Strangers
Platen’s circle of acquaintances grew and he was never again short

He wrote fewer poems but led a happier life and overcame his self-disgust. At Venice he braved the excremental smells of
summer to swim in the lagoon with young Venetians. He rediscovered
Naples, where ‘love between men is so frequent that one never expects
even the boldest demands to be refused’.
In the early autumn of 1835, with cholera spreading through
of friends.

Italy,

Platen sailed for Sicily. He died at Syracuse in December and

was buried

His grave became one of
on the gay Grand Tour. Naturally, the shrine

in the Protestant cemetery.

the pilgrimage sites

was decently discreet, the ironic epilogue to a life largely devoted
to keeping up appearances.

As if to underline the fact that he had

been tolerated rather than accepted, the tomb was adorned with a
bas-relief woman weeping over an urn.

The tearful woman on Platen’s grave is a more appropriate
symbol for the treatment of homosexuals than the gallows or the

padded cell. Silence was by far the commonest form of persecution.
If the

works of a sodomite gave pleasure to ‘decent’ people, it was

customary to believe that the author was not a sodomite at all. In
1809, during an investigation of the

German playwright August

Wilhelm Iffland’s ‘immoral attraction to his own sex’, an informer of
the Viennese police recorded general incredulity that

‘a

devotee

of sodomy’ could write such ‘moral’ plays.
If evidence of ‘vice’

became overwhelming, it could still be sec-

tioned off and treated as a professional weakness or a temporary
aberration. Even Havelock Ellis took the view that Oscar Wilde was

fundamentally heterosexual but became homosexual ‘by the exercise
of intellectual curiosity and esthetic interest’. Exceptions could always

be made without weakening the general prejudice.
In the right circumstances, a limited form of ‘coming out’ could

even act

as a vaccination against

homophobic aggression. Barbey

d’Aurevilly, the dandified novelist and biographer of Beau Brummell,

kept his sexuality secret by appearing to do the opposite.

When

challenged directly, he had the wit to respond with amusing halfadmissions:

‘My tastes incline me to it, my principles permit it, but

Outings
the ugliness of my contemporaries repels me.’ One of Heine’s complaints about Platen
sobriety.

was that he hid his feelings behind a mask of

No such complaint could be made about men like Barbey

d’Aurevilly or the fifth

Marquess of Anglesey who paraded along

Piccadilly and the Paris Boulevards in the 1890s, rouged, powdered,

perfumed and cradling an equally fragrant poodle festooned with pink
ribbons.

Evidence of ‘camp’ behaviour is notoriously difficult to interpret

and apparently more common in the late 18th and 19th centuries
than in earlier periods. This may reflect the spread of more consistent
views of what constituted a ‘molly’ or a ‘pouf’: once the image existed,
it

could be acted up

to.

Or it may reflect a more confident gay

subculture, or simply the camouflaging effect of certain fashions: the

prmeux, the Regency ‘fop’, the Restoration dandy. Fashions passed
between the homosexual and heterosexual worlds quite freely. Some
types of information are simply unavailable - gestures, expressions,
significant smiles.

There is however a noticeable continuity, from the performances
of Leclercq and Sgricci to the ‘queans’ of Victorian and Edwardian

London and

the

gay celebrities of 21st-century

television.

The

Edwardian music-hall entertainer Fred Barnes, for instance, seems a

Count von Platen, but he was able to
exploit the same exasperating double standard. Newspapers of the
distant relative of Sgricci or

time slavered over the evidence of arrested sodomites, but the effeminate Fred (‘Freda’ to the boys in the gallery) delighted his audiences

with brazen innuendos. His hit song ‘The Black Sheep of the Family’
(1907) caused a storm of applause

when it was first performed.

‘Only a few people’, Fred remembered, ‘glared at me as though I

were a monstrosity’
It’s a queer, queer world we live in
And Dame Nature plays a funny game Some get all the sunshine,

Others get the shame.*

*

‘Shame’ was another code word for homosexual love - as in Alfred Douglas’s ‘In

Praise of Shame’ (‘Of all sweet passions Shame is loveliest’). For ‘queer’, see p. 262,

[97]

Strangers

The consistently ambiguous reaction to performing gays suggests
that western societies - which seem to have been uniquely repressive

- did after all provide a role for homosexual behaviour. Most of the
evidence presented so far relates to prominent individuals and artists,

but the partial immunity of public entertainers was also available, at
the usual cost - self-mockery and humiliation, strict observance of the

ever-changing rules, obligatory good humour and constant personal

danger - to people with less lofty aspirations.

As pioneers and anthropologists discovered, most societies sanction

some form of homosexuality. North American Indians were found to
be extraordinarily accepting of sexual ambiguity in the form of the

‘man-woman’, the ‘berdache’, the
or the

‘joya’.

‘bote’, the ‘agokwa’, the ‘alyha’

Noble savages had been seen doing needlework and

washing dishes; missionaries and explorers were offered oral and anal
intercourse by hospitable transvestites.

Remarkably few writers interpreted queer behaviour among the
Indians as a sign of barbarism. Closer acquaintance showed that
the ‘berdache’ played a precise role and lived under severe constraints.

Alany of them were revered for their prophetic powers, but they were
also often seen as an unfortunate and hilarious aberration.

In the 1830s, the painter

George Gatlin found similar attitudes

along the Missouri and the Ohio. The gorgeous ‘dandies’ who wore
their hair like women, carried turkey-feather fans and spent the day

preening themselves on beautiful ponies, were held in low regard and
referred to as ‘old women’. When Gatlin asked to paint one of these
‘gay and tinselled bucks’, he was told that, if he did, he would have
to destroy the portraits he had painted of the chiefs.

This orderly form of victimization would have been quite familiar
to

any Victorian ‘pouf’ who happened to be captured by a North

American tribe. As one of the most famous Victorian sodomy trials
showed, acceptance and ridicule were just as much the norm in central

London as on the banks of the Ohio.

The protagonists of this tragi-comic trial were Ernest Boulton,
twenty-two, the son of a stockbroker (a.k.a. Lady Arthur Clinton or
‘Stella, Star of the Strand’) and Frederick Park,

twenty-three (known

to his friends as ‘Fanny’), who worked for a firm of solicitors. Fanny

and Stella specialized in melodramas and operettas. They played to

[98]

Outings
full

houses from Scarborough to Southend and received ecstatic

reviews.

No one who sees their photographs will be surprised to learn

that everyone knew that they were men. Sometimes, as in Love and

Rain (1868), Stella’s lucky husband was played by the young gentleman

who fed, lodged and loved her: Lord Arthur Clinton, MR
Off stage (if they ever were), they wore tight trousers and lownecked shirts, powdered their faces and flounced up and down the
Strand and the Burlington Arcade, eyeing up the men.
Unfortunately, their ‘giggling and chirruping’ attracted the wrong
sort of attention. The Metropolitan Police kept them under surveil-

lance for a year. They were observed to light their cigarettes ‘with
gestures of unnecessary flamboyance’. ‘They did not swing their arms
like

men, but walked like women do.’ Worst of all, when her lace

came unpinned one day at the Strand Theatre, Fanny availed herself
of the facilities. ‘Was she dressed as a woman?’ the attendant was
later asked. ‘Dressed as a Lady. The Lady said, “Have you a Ladies’
Room?”, and I said, “Yes, madam, walk this way if you please.”
Outside, the constables were waiting. At Bow Street, Fanny’s com’

panion was found to be wearing a sleeveless, low-cut scarlet dress
with white kid gloves. Further inspection revealed petticoats and
stays, and,

according to the police doctor, a distended anus. Fanny

and Stella were charged with conspiracy to commit a felony (sodomy).

The following morning (Friday, 29 April 1870), they appeared in
court. Park’s counsel,

Mr Straight, failed to prove their innocence

and they were bound over for trial at the Old Bailey.

One reporter called for ‘these misguided youths’ to be severely
punished. A crime had been committed that should ‘arouse the just
indignation of every true Englishman’. This was a reference, not to

sodomy, but to Mr Park’s use of the ladies’ room. The petticoated

monster had ‘had the unblushing impudence to apply to the female
attendants to fasten up the gathers of his skirt’.

Rome and Sodom

had nothing to compare with ‘the atrocious phases of London life as
they exist in the nineteenth century’.
It

would be an insult to Victorians to assume that this pompous

blather represented a common view. At the main trial, the jury and

the public gallery observed the parade of exhibits - silk stockings,
curling irons, ‘boxes of Violet

Powder and Bloom of Roses’, and

[99]

Strangers
twenty false chignons.

They chortled at the testimony of at least

twenty men who cruised the West End in drag. And when the girlyvoiced

Mr Thomas Gibbings, who hosted drag balls at Haxell’s

Hotel, said that he saw nothing wrong with ‘going in drag’, he was
loudly applauded.

Boulton and Park had carried the stage into the courtroom. The
trial

was

a

bedroom farce, complete with a housemaid who had

witnessed daily visits from the hairdresser and heard them call each
to him [said the housemaid], I beg your
pardon but I really think you are a man. He said he was Lady Arthur

other ‘darling’:

‘I

said

Clinton, he said, I am Lady Clinton, Lord Arthur’s wife.’ He even

had a wedding-ring to prove it.

The prosecution exhibited the calling cards of homosexual prostitutes

and

tried to frighten the jury with plagues of

‘national character’

was

at stake.

sodomy: the

The defence maintained, rather

implausibly, that such public shenanigans were unlikely to be a front
for sexual depravity. It asked the jury to prove by its verdict that the
‘plague’ did not exist. Anticipating the Wolfenden Report by eighty-

seven years. Lord Chief Justice Cockburn wisely observed that the
conspiracy charge ‘operates unjustly, unfairly, and oppressively’.

When the acquittal was pronounced, applause broke out again and
Fanny fainted in the dock.

The escapades of Boulton and Park and their sympathetic treatment by most of the court suggest that the two main interpretations
of camp behaviour are both correct. ‘Camp’ has its own intricacies
and rituals, and the idea that it simply parodies female behaviour
depends on a very odd view of women. It appears to be a spontaneous feature of gay culture, from Ancient Rome and pre-conquest

North America to the present day. At the same time, it can be seen
as an example of ‘minstrelization’ - a tactful conformity to

common

prejudice designed to win a kind of condescending acceptance. The

two interpretations are not mutually exclusive. Aspects of gay life that

seem to have certain social advantages can be exaggerated for the
benefit of a hostile audience. Similar survival techniques are practised

by schoolchildren with similarly varying degrees of success.
In either case, the performance was precarious. As long as the
‘disgraceful’ behaviour was seen as part of an act - as it was in

[lOO]

Outings
the theatrical setting of a courtroom and even in the street - it could

be accepted and applauded. But if it seemed to be claiming a place
in ‘real

life’,

it

was once again a threat. Lord Arthur Clinton had

appeared quite openly with his darling Stella, but when he saw his

name in the papers in connection with the trial, he killed himself. He
was thirty years old. The official cause of death was scarlet fever.
Stella survived, but she lost a loving husband and, as far as we know,

was never seen in public again.

It WILL BEAPPARENTby now that the title of this book might almost

have been ‘But Not in

Britain’. In

England

especially,

sodomites

seem to have been treated more harshly than elsewhere. Whatever
the causes - Protestant morals, the rise of the nuclear family, early
industrialization reinforcing the sexual division of labour - the main

observable difference in English attitudes

is

the ease with which

connections were made between sodomy and other sins. In England,
a sodomite was never just a sodomite.

The Bishop of Clogher, the ‘mitred reprobate’ who was caught
with a handsome guardsman and his breeches round his ankles at the

White Hart Inn in Westminster in 1822, represented ‘The Crimes
of the Clergy’ (the title of a pamphlet of 1823).

Richard Heber,

MP for Oxford University, who fled to Brussels in

1826 under suspicion of ‘unnatural practices’
Scott put

it),

(as his friend

Walter

William Bankes, MP, who compromised himself by

the walls of Westminster

Abbey (1833) and then in Green Park

(1841), and Edward Protheroe, MP, who was accused in 1847 and

1850 of luring boys to his home, represented the moral bankruptcy
of politicians.

Lord Arthur Somerset, who was implicated in the Cleveland Street
brothel scandal of 1889, stood for the ‘toffs’ who thought that they

could exploit the workers and then

flee to

sunny climes - as The

North London Press complained:

My Lord Gomorrah sat in his chair
Sipping his costly wine;

[lOl]

Strangers

He was safe in France, that’s called the fair;
In a city some call ‘Boo-line’.

The scapegoating of sodomites was not of course peculiar to
England. In the late 1 9th and early 20th centuries, some of the biggest
political scandals in France, Germany, Denmark and Austro-Hungary

were fuelled by revelations of sodomy. Nevertheless, scapegoating
seems to have been more consistently and enthusiastically practised
in England. Even today, British tabloid newspapers devote more space

than their foreign equivalents to the moral implications of homosexual
buggery. English communities abroad could be just as savage. Edward

Gibbon found it ‘astonishing’ that anyone should befriend William
Beckford, who fled from England after a scandalous love affair with
the teenage Viscount William Courtenay: ‘Even supposing him innocent, still some regard was due to the opinion of the world.’
It is all the more surprising to find so

many exceptions to the rule

that the rule itself looks questionable. Trials and other investigations

often turned up evidence of casual acquiescence.

Of course, com-

pared to other fields of social history, the evidence is scarce and tends
to be concentrated in certain areas. There is, however, a noticeable

gap between the lynch mentality of sensationalist newspapers and
everyday behaviour. As Rictor Norton points out, not every hetero-

Londoner who was approached by a homosexual prostitute
summoned a policeman, and ‘even the law-abiding citizens who lived
in the neighbourhood of a known molly house seldom heaped abuse
sexual

upon its customers or brought the tavern to the attention of the
police’. In 1810, two men were able to set up and furnish a molly
house in Vere Street with a chapel for weddings and every sort of
feminine necessity and run it for almost six months before it was
raided.

American cities at the turn of the century were just as tolerant,
according to a correspondent of Havelock Ellis:
Ninety-nine normal men out of a hundred have been accosted on the
streets by inverts, or have among their acquaintances men

whom they

know to be sexually inverted. Everyone has seen inverts and knows
what they are. The public attitude toward them is generally a negative
one - indifference, amusement, contempt.

Outings
Even the Metropolitan Police showed signs of moderation. In
1854, two bizarrely dressed men were arrested in London outside a
drag ball that was regularly held at Druids’ Hall in Turnagain Lane.

One was ‘completely equipped in female attire of the present day’;
the other, a man of sixty, was clad

‘in

the pastoral garb of a shep-

herdess of the golden age’. The ball had been known to the police
for eighteen months, but, as the magistrate learned to his amazement,

the constable had been told by his sergeant not to interfere unless the

perversions were carried on in public.

This relatively relaxed attitude, which may reflect the views of
individual policemen rather than official policy, could still be found

1889 when the homosexual prostitute Jack Saul was interviewed

in

about his business:
‘Were you hunted out by the police?’
‘No, they have never interfered.

They have always been kind to

me.’

‘Do you mean they have deliberately shut their eyes to your infamous practices?’
‘They have to shut their eyes to more than me.’

The constables may of course have had their tolerance enhanced
by money. Ellis’s correspondent later reported an equally benign and
well-oiled police force in American cities: ‘The inverts have their own

“clubs” [.

.

.]

attached to saloons.^ ‘You will rightly infer that the police

know of these places and endure their existence for a consideration;
not unusual for the inquiring stranger to be directed there by a

it is

policeman.’
In the gaslit streets of Victorian London, famous ‘margeries’ like
‘Eair

Eliza’

sallied

forth

each evening,

courting customers

and

shocking decent citizens from Holborn to Regent Street (according
to the YokeVs Preceptor:

H

.

.

.’,

or,

More Sprees in London!, c.

1850). ‘Betsy

another ‘notorious and shameless pouf’, patrolled the Strand,

St Martin’s Court and Eleet Street, apparently with impunity. These

metropolitan mollies were as much a tourist attraction as the ‘fairies’
of Broadway and Madison Square. Voyeuristic tours of gay districts

were not a 20th-century invention.

Even when ‘poufs’ were molested, it was not necessarily because

[103]

Strangers
of their supposed inclinations. In October 1889, Inspector Ferret of
‘H’ Division arrived at Bromley Street in the East End to find 600

people surrounding Edward Hamblar,
joiner.

sixty-one-year-old ship’s

a

Mr Hamblar was wearing a hat and veil, a print dress, two
and

flannel petticoats

‘a

large dress improver’ (a bustle). ‘All the

people around the prisoner imagined he was “Jack the Ripper”, and
the excitement was very great in consequence.’

Outside London, away from the bulging eyes of journalists and the
nightly parade of mollies, even the most notorious delinquents were

not treated with universal revulsion. The disgraced Bishop of Clogher,
after leading a jolly life in Paris, went to live in Glasgow and then in

Edinburgh under an assumed name. Some of his neighbours discovered his true identity but ‘kept the secret until after his death’.

William Beckford, who returned to live behind a seven-mile wall in
his fantastic

Gothic palace at Eonthill, was liked and feted by the

Most of his upper-class visitors knew of his so-called crimes
but thought them either inconsequential or picturesque. Hester
locals.

Thrale, the friend of Samuel Johnson, was astounded at how quickly
Beckford’s ^favourite Propensity^ was forgotten: ‘I hear nothing said of
M*^ Beckford but as an Authour. What a World it is!!!!’

These pliant attitudes to homosexuality in almost all its forms were
prevalent throughout the Victorian age.
silently condoned,

nationality:

the

even

if they ignored

‘married’

artists

Odd couples were often

distinctions of rank, age and

Charles

Ricketts

and

Charles

Shannon; the sculptor Lord Ronald Gower and his stunning Italian

Symonds and his gondolier with ‘the wild glance of a
Edward Eitzgerald and his Lowestoft fisherman, ‘Posh’.

valet; J. A.

Triton’;

Local trawlermen interviewed in the 1900s appear to have taken

same calm view of the matter as Russia’s urban serving classes
took of what they called ‘gentlemen’s mischief. ‘Ah! Mr. EitzGerald
was a good gennleman to him - that he wuzV Posh himself was never
the

ostracized for his attachment.
Sexuality in

most cases was simply not the dominant concern.

‘Strange stories’ about the rural idyll of Edward Carpenter and his

working-class lover George Merrill at Millthorpe near Sheffield

might have been inspired by Carpenter’s writings on ‘homogenic love’
(friends had warned him that ‘a menage without a woman’ would

[104]

Outings
look ‘queer’), but the neighbours were more concerned about an
influx of socialists and vegetarians. The local letter-writing fool,
M. D. O’Brien, was just a mad exception: ‘Is the infamy which is
said to have brought destruction upon Sodom and Gomorrah likely

to bring in one form or another anything less than destruction upon

the trade of Sheffield?’, he

wondered in Socialism and Infamy: the

Homogenic or Comrade Love Exposed (1909). Anyone who could call
the gentle Carpenter a ‘disseminator of filth and dirt vomited

up

from the foul pit of sin and death’ and who worried about the effect
of homosexuality on the steel industry was not representative; he was

simply a lunatic with time on his hands.

The same mixture of the tolerant and the indifferent, with the
occasional attention-seeking windbag, was apparent in reactions to
the Aesthetic

Movement of the

flowery excesses were

1870s and 1880s.

The aesthetes’

mocked so affectionately that it is easy to

assume that their audience was quite innocent of sexual subtexts until
the unmasking of Oscar Wilde. But swooning aesthetes were seen
to be suspiciously pederastic long before the

Wilde trials. Elbow-

nudging satires like W. H. Mallock’s The New Republic (1877) and
Robert Hichens’ The Green Carnation (1894) ‘confirmed the worst

As Richard Ellmann and others have shown, Wilde’s
sexuality was already in doubt at the height of his popularity. He may
suspicions’.

even have married to stifle the rumours. In W. S. Gilbert’s Patience
(1881), the Wildean aesthete Bunthorne sings about ‘an attachment

a la Plato / Eor a bashful young potato / Ora not too Erench, Erench
bean!’ An audience in Texas in the early 1880s may not have grasped

the reference to Plato but it still found Gilbert’s mincing aesthetes

almost worthy of a lynching. In 1883, Punch called Wilde a ‘MaryAnn’, which was a common term for a homosexual prostitute, while

The Scots Observer pretended to believe that Wilde had written The
Picture of Dorian

Gray (1890) for ‘outlawed noblemen and telegraph

boys’ - a blatant allusion to the Cleveland Street scandal.

Even without textual

analysis,

the sexual subtext was

all

quite

obvious to most people. Colleagues of Edward Shelley, the office boy
at Wilde’s publishers, teased

him knowingly about his friendship:

‘They implied scandalous things,’ Shelley told the court. ‘They called

me “Mrs Wilde” and “Miss Oscar”.’

[105]

Strangers
Lord Alfred Douglas was certainly right to say that much of ‘the
violent prejudice which existed against homosexuality in those days’

was ‘simulated and hypocritical’. This single, unpleasant fact goes

some way to explaining the impression of routine hostility: some
of the most vociferous opponents of ‘sodomites’ - the Marquis of
Queensberry, Edmmnd Gosse, Freud’s paranoid judge Schreber and,
later,

Douglas himself - were homosexual. The young J. A. Symonds

denounced the homosexual headmaster of Harrow just when he was

becoming aware of his own sexuality. Trial reports and other memoirs
show that the headmaster in Scott Moncrieff’s ‘Evensong and Morwe
Song’ (1908), who punishes boys for sins he had committed in his
own youth, was not unusual. Scott Aloncrieff himself was expelled

from Winchester for publishing the story.

The sad phenomenon of homosexual treachery was described and exemplified - by Proust in Sodome et Gomorrhe (translated by
Scott Moncrieff during his voluntary exile in Italy):

These descendants of the Sodomites

[.

.

.]

are so readily admitted into

most exclusive clubs that, whenever a Sodomite fails to secure
election, the black balls are for the most part cast by other Sodomites,
the

who make a point of condemning sodomy, having inherited the mendacity that enabled their ancestors to escape from the accursed city.

The mere absence of persecution hardly amounts to tolerance.
Proust’s black-balling sodomites could never abandon their camouflage and ‘would repair to Sodom only on days of supreme necessity,

when their own town was empty, at those seasons when hunger drives
the wolf from the woods’. Few Victorians could discuss the subject
publicly without flaunting their moral credentials. Prejudice also

operated in invisible ways, through landlords, employers, family

members and friends. And, as Jeremy Bentham pointed out, ‘the
antipathy itself [is] a punishment’.
*

Any description of attitudes to homosexuality must take account
of the argument that homosexuality in the modern sense did not
exist. If, as Foucault’s theory has it, ‘the homosexual’ was not ‘socially

constructed’ until the end of the 19th century, before then homosexual

[io6]

Outings
people can hardly be said to have been tolerated or, for that matter,
persecuted.

Evidence of surprisingly intimate behaviour can give the impression

Europe and America, libidos used to roam quite freely. In
this view, the factory regime of breeding couples had yet to replace the
free-range sexual economy. In 1837, a young lawyer called Abraham
Lincoln arrived in Springfield, Illinois and asked a storekeeper,
Joshua Speed, for the price of a ‘single bedstead’. Speed took pity on
the handsome bachelor and offered to share his double bed. The
that, in

two men became close friends and slept together for the next four
years. This justifies their inclusion in Jonathan Katz’s Love Stories. Sex

Between Men Before Homosexuality (2001), although the only approxi-

mation to

‘genital contact’ that

can be cited

is

Speed’s advice to

Lincoln on where he can ‘get some’ (i.e. sex with women).
Lincoln’s lodging arrangements

show that two men could sleep

together without raising eyebrows. However, this was true only if

codes of conduct were observed.

The point is made implicitly by

another story discovered by Katz. In 1 846, Edward McCosker of the

New York Police Department was accused of touching a man’s private
parts. The owner of the parts had taken offence and shouted at Mc-

Cosker, calling him ‘pretty policeman’ and other names. McCosker

subsequently lost his job. But in his defence, his colleague Erancis

Donnelly stated that he had ‘been in the habit of sleeping with said

McCosker for the last three months, and that said McCosker never
to deponent’s knowledge acted indecent or indelicate’.

Whatever connotations these domestic practicalities might have
today, this was clearly a society for which homosexual behaviour
existed

and was subject to punishment. The difference between

sharing a bed and using it as a platform for sex was just as obvious as
it is

now.

This is not to say that changes in behaviour have not altered the
emotional landscape so

much that we now need a whole array of

historical positioning equipment to find our way about in the world

of our great-great-grandparents.

The jitteriness of modern male

friendships was quite foreign to the early 19th century. Some means

of expressing affection have certainly been

lost.

Compared to his

Romantic ancestors, 21st-century man has only a small repertoire of

[107]

Strangers
cautious gestures and words with which to make his feelings known
to male friends.

On the other hand, future historians will find ample

evidence of homoerotic behaviour beyond the gay community: private
letters,
field,

locker-room language, hugging and kissing on the football

and so on.

The belief in a less discriminating sexual era is based, of course,
on more than Lincoln’s double bed. Some striking examples of what
looks like unabashed homosexuality have been found in the letters of

two young friends in the 1820s: a law student called Thomas Jefferson Withers, who later married Mary Chesnut (of Civil War diaries
fame), and James Hammond, the future Governor of South Carolina.

A historian with no experience of the writing habits of adolescent
men, then or now, might detect clear signs of untrammelled eroticism
in Withers’ letter to

Hammond on 15 May 1826:

Dear Jim:
[...]! feel some inclination to learn whether you yet sleep in your

and whether you yet have the extravagant delight of poking
and punching a writhing Bedfellow with your long fleshen pole - the
Shirt-tail,

exquisite touches of which I have often had the honor of feeling? Let

me say unto thee that unless thou changest former habits in this
particular, thou wilt be represented by every future

Chum as a nuisance.

Four months later. Withers supposed that his friend’s ‘fleshen pole’
or ^elongated protruberance^ (sic) was more active than ever and that

Hammond must be ‘charging over the pine barrens of your locality,
braying, like an ass, at every she-male you can discover’.

This back-slapping style may reflect the indiscriminate lunges of
an adolescent libido in a pre-homosexual age, but it can hardly be
treated as a window onto the sexual

mores of an entire period. At

shows the difference between public and private expression.
A useful contrast can be found in the diary of Albert Dodd, who was
best,

it

a law student at Hartford, Connecticut in 1836.

Dodd was supposed

to be in love with a woman called Julia but was painfully besotted

instead with a man called Anthony Halsey:

How completely I loved him, how I doated on him!
he shared my pillow - or

I his,

[.

.

.]

Often too

and then how sweet to sleep with

[io8]

Outings
him, to hold his beloved form in my embrace, to have his arms about

my neck, to imprint upon his face sweet kisses! It was happiness
complete.

Dodd’s passionate, private declaration, his happiness and despair,
his

longing for Halsey’s ‘youth, beauty and innocence’, are quite

different from the ironic celebration of Jim Hammond’s peripatetic

Only a late-20th-century eye would confuse this ostentatious
horse-play with Dodd’s whole-hearted commitment to another
human being. Hammond went on to marry a Charleston heiress
and became a keen seducer of teenage girls. Dodd never married and
drowned in the Mackinaw river when he was twenty-six.
penis.

Without

telepathy,

interpretations

are

The

always speculative.

photographs of 19th-century men embracing or holding hands in

American photographers’ studios - reproduced in Ajfectionate Men:

A Photographic History of a Century of Male Couples^ 1850s to 1950s
(1998) or in Dear Friends: American Photographs of Men Together,

1840-1918 (2001) - remain, as one of the compilers says, ‘stubbornly
ambiguous objects’. The impossibility of plotting every sign of passion

on a sexual graph is what made the conviction of Boulton and Park
- once the anatomical evidence had been discredited - so difficult to
obtain. The prosecuting counsel could only resort to an impression

(but an accurate impression, as it happened) of passionate, physical
love and ask the jury to exercise its stylistic common sense:

A man crying at parting for a few weeks with another man
What
language is that? ... A landlord examining Mr Boulton’s thighs!
.

.

.

.

.

.

What does it mean?
In the full colour of personal experience, the indeterminacy that

seems to be a mark of the age of black and white simply did not exist.

communal bed by the banks of the Genesee river in 1791,
Chateaubriand knew immediately what to think when he felt the leg
of his Dutch guide slide up against his own: he ran out with his

In a

bearskin to sleep in the moonlight, ‘cursing the customs of our noble
ancestors’. As the ranting author of The Infamous Life ofJohn Church

(1817) pointed out, acts of physical affection are always a matter of

personal judgment:

[109]

Strangers
[T. A. said] that the very affectionate Vere-street ‘Mr Church kindly put

his

arms round my neck and kissed me twice, and asked me politely

to sleep with him.’ Lord, what has sin done!

However the Reverend

brother T. A. further adds, ‘I declined the latter offer, of course’, &c.

but how far this statement may be true respecting his declining the
latter offer, after his allowing that pious brute to kiss him twice, must

be left with the reader to judge for himself.

Each case has its own peculiarities and shows a variety of different
attitudes.

Perhaps the best hope for a general conclusion lies in the

concept of ‘submersion’.

The idea is that, in certain periods and

places, fashions in clothing

and behaviour allow certain forms of

homosexual expression to pass unnoticed. They are as it were sub-

merged in the wider culture. Custine was able for a time to mask his
feelings with the mal du siecle. Lovers could kiss and embrace under
the umbrella of ‘Romantic friendship’.

The erotic male nudes of

David, Girodet and Gericault were surrounded on the walls of the
Paris Salon by a host of other male nudes in the neoclassical style.

Even if a painter of Ganymedes, wrestling Greeks and Saint Sebastians

were suspected of unnatural desires, the followers of fashion

could act as a shield. A proliferation of neoclassical genitals was almost
as good as a fig-leaf.

‘Submersion’ could also take more concrete forms: single-sex
boarding-schools, workhouses, prisons and penal colonies, ocean-

going ships (Herman Melville’s ‘wooden-walled Gomorrahs of the
deep’),

mining camps in California, South Africa and Australia. In

special circumstances, special rules applied. In 1853, an old American
sailor expressed the

view that buggery was fine on board ship but

that, on land, buggers should be shot.
It is difficult in

these extreme conditions to distinguish epidermic

episodes from lasting, amphibious passion that thrived on land and
sea. Pictures

of waltzing Californian miners say nothing about the

sexual desires of the dancers. The men who took the woman’s part
in the

dance were not necessarily able to identify a deeper differ-

ence in themselves. Situations like these could be just as confusing to
the participants as they are to the observer. Many people who turned

out to be homosexual assumed that their experiences in the ‘sexual

[no]

Outings
cocytus’ of public school had been the cause of their homosexuality.

Many more looked (or claimed to look) on their puerile deflowering
by classmates, prefects or teachers as a curious or regrettable incident
with little or no effect on their future life.

Homo- and heterosexuality are concepts that bear the imprint of
the periods in which they were invented. But to say that no such

dichotomy existed until these terms were coined is to sit on the
dictionary and expect it to function as a magic carpet. The jocular

Withers

and the

love-lorn

Dodd were

both

describing

erotic

behaviour and cannot be neatly assigned to a particular sexual category.

For that matter, nor can anyone else. But this does not mean

that they lived, loved and died in a sexual Wild West.

The idea that tolerance or acceptance of homosexuality is a
non-subject until the late 19th century also takes

a

more popular

form. Widespread awareness of homosexuality is often said to be a
recent consequence of gay liberation. ‘It used to be possible’ - so the

remark usually goes - ‘for two women (or men)

to live together

without being suspected of homosexuality.’
Like most complaints about modern sexual mores, this idea is not
peculiar to our own time. In the 1920s, a woman in Katharine Davis’s

survey of unmarried American female graduates identified ‘the ethics

of homosexual relationships’ as ‘the most serious problem the business
or professional woman has to face today’: ‘In my city some business

women are hesitating to take apartments together for fear of the
interpretation that may be put upon it.’
The kinds of behaviour that trigger a censorious reaction change
over time, but anxiety at perceived transgressions can be found in any
period. In The Intermediate Sex (1908), Edward Carpenter complained
that teachers

were reacting to affectionate pupils with deliberate

coldness for fear of ‘a bastard public opinion’ and its seedy misinterpretations:

Rather than run such a risk as this he seals the fountains of the heart,
withholds the help which love alone can give, and deliberately nips the
tender bud which is turning to him for light and warmth.

[Ill]

Strangers
In 1896, Colette’s husband Willy worried that homosexual interpretations

of Wagner’s

Parsifal

would impose

similarly

ridiculous

constraints on artists: ‘So now every tragic character will be forced
to

encumber himself with a woman for fear of being taxed with

homosexual

The

inclinations?’

Daily

Telegraphy

reporting on the

Boulton and Park trial, deemed any such anxiety a good thing:

The most effeminate and foolish lad will hesitate before, even in joke,
he puts his signature to amatory effusions addressed to some one of
his companions. That this should be so is a marked benefit.

The fear of being branded homosexual is not a recent phenomenon.
It was sufficiently common in 1871 for a French psychiatrist, Legrand
du Saulle, to introduce a new category of persecution complex: ‘Fear
of being considered a sodomite’. He cited two cases from 1845 and

The second patient, having read Dr Tardieu’s description of

1868.

the physical attributes of ‘pederasts’, asked to be examined by a doctor
so that he could be officially certified as ‘normal’.

Half a century before, in 1824, referring to James I’s ‘propensity
and the ‘base passion’ of close friends, Ralph Waldo
Emerson described in his diary the contamination of private relationto favourites’

ships by public suspicions:

Who is he that thought he might clasp his friend in embraces so
tight, in daily intercourse so familiar that
[.

.

.]

they two should be one?

They foolishly trusted to each other the last secret of their
They erred in fancying that friendship

bosoms, their weakness.

[.

.

.]

would pardon infirmities & that a just confidence demanded that the
last door of the heart should be unclosed, and even its secret sensuality

revealed.

Coleridge had similar worries about Shakespeare and his supposedly pederastic sonnets.
‘the Disposition’ (as

He knew that there was such a thing as

opposed to ‘the absurd & despicable Act’), but

he denied that Shakespeare was guilty of it:

O my Son! I pray fervently that thou may’st know inwardly how
impossible it was for a Shakespere not to have been in his heart’s heart
chaste.

Outings
This tense denial suggests that Coleridge’s meditations on his own
romantic friendships and dreams of being sexually assaulted by men

were not just bland perambulations in a garden of innocence. The
determination to see homosexual

men as sodomites and buggers

was an attempt to keep strange love certifiably separate. Shelley also

boundary between passion and appetite. In his

tried to locate the

unpublished ‘Discourse on the Manners of the Antient Greeks Relative to the Subject

of Love’ (1818), he stretched a cordon sanitaire

through 2,000 years of history - noble Greeks and Shakespeare on

one side, decadent Romans and Cavaliers on the other:

may blunt the harshness of censure [of Greek love] also to reflect
own literature a certain sentimental
attachment towards persons of the same sex was not uncommon.
It

that in the golden age of our

Shakespeare has devoted the impassioned and profound poetry of his
sonnets to commemorate an attachment of this kind, which we cannot
question was wholly divested of any unworthy alloy. Towards the age

of Charles 2"^ it is said that this romantic friendship degenerated into
licentiousness and this latter age bears the same relation to the former
as the first of the

Roman Empire to [a gap in the ms].

Not all attempts to separate the innocent from the guilty were
so erudite. Smollett’s Roderick Random (1748), when subjected to
the oddly affectionate Earl Strutwell’s defence of sodomy, worries
that he might be suspected of sharing ‘his taste in love’.

For some-

one who was faced with an urgent, sodomitical Earl, the difference
between permissible

affection

and

outrageous

love

was almost

tangible:
I began to be apprehensive that his lordship finding that I had travelled,

was afraid I might have been infected with this spurious and sordid
disease abroad,

and took this method of sounding my sentiments on

the subject. Fired at this supposed suspicion, I argued against it with
great warmth

of it [.

.

[.

.

.]

and declared my utter detestation and abhorrence

.]

The Earl smiled at my indignation, told me he was glad to find my
opinion of the matter so conformable to his own, and that what he

had advanced was only to provoke

me to an answer, with which

he professed himself perfectly well pleased.

[113]

Strangers

The problem is not that homosexuality did not exist but that sexual
as fashions in dress. The continual

behaviour changes as rapidly

fluctuations in notions of what constitutes erotic behaviour are even
less perceptible over short periods than changes in hat-size and hemline. Rules seem to be fixed and are rigorously policed. But

different periods are
tacular.

when two

compared, the cumulative changes are spec-

A 21st-century person transported to the early 19th century

would be

in a

film adaptations

permanent state of shock. Modern

television

and

might impose more ‘liberated’ mores on Victorian

dramas, but they also expunge the details that would unsettle or
distract a modern audience: breast-feeding in the drawing-room, men

sharing beds, fathers kissing daughters on the lips. At the same time,
the artificial ageing of the past demands the removal of unexpected
similarities with the present: husbands and wives celebrating their sex
life

in letters, fear of terrorist attack, concern about the brain-rotting

effects of popular culture, and jokes about homosexuality.

Even in the same period and social class, behaviour differed from
one region or one person to the next. Roderick Random is startled
to be hugged and kissed ‘with a seemingly paternal affection’ by Earl

Strutwell but does not suspect an ulterior motive until he learns
is ‘notorious for a passion for his sex’. A German
London in 1818 warned his readers that ‘The kiss of

that Strutwell
traveller in

friendship between men is strictly avoided as inclining towards the
sin

regarded in England as more abominable than any other.’

A

generation before, public kissing had been quite common, to judge

by the author of Satan's HaTuest Home (1749) who complained about
‘‘fulsome

Eellows Slavering every

Time they meet. Squeezing each

other’s Hand, and other like indecent Symptoms'. In the United States,

men kissing men - ‘that salute of American comrades’ (Whitman) remained acceptable for most of the 19th century. Even so, William
Cobbett felt that he could use the custom to attack DemocraticRepublic clubs in the 1790s: ‘Must not their gander- frolicks, and

and hugging, and kissing one another, be expected
to cause a good deal of pouting and jealousy [among women?]’ Terms
of endearment were also regulated - not just in the 19th century.
their squeezing,

On holiday in the Basque country. Bill Gorton tells the narrator of
Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises (1926):

Outings
‘Listen. You’re a hell of a good guy,

body on earth.

I couldn’t tell

and I’m fonder of you than any-

you that in New York. It’d mean I was a

faggot.’

The fact that the line between Romantic friendship and passionate love is hard to find does not mean that no line existed. But
this is

not quite so obvious in female friendships. In women, the

difference was often less visible and perhaps less important.

Con-

vention allowed for more intimacy in body and word, and it would

be easy

now to assume that erotic,

lesbian relationships existed

primarily in the minds of male novelists and painters - as Anne Lister

pretended to believe while flirting with Maria Barlow: ‘We agreed
it

was a scandal invented by the men, who were bad enough for

anything

.’
.

.

The example of Anne Lister, an unusually independent young
gentlewoman from Halifax, Yorkshire, shows that some women at
least formed physical and emotional relationships that were recogniz-

ably lesbian in a

modern

sense.

It

shows too

that,

when

these

relationships were condoned or tolerated, it was not always because

of ignorance. People who knew Anne Lister in the 1820s discussed

her sexuality and were quite aware that something set her apart from
other spinsters. Local labourers made jocular remarks: ‘That’s a man’;

‘Does your cock stand?’ Her maid thought ‘merely, that I have my
own particular ways’. She could even discuss her ‘oddities’ with friends
who were not ‘odd’ themselves:
Brought on the subject of my own oddities of which Emma seems
aware but to which she does not appear to object. In fact she thinks

me agreeable & likes me. So does her husband. She looked pretty this
evening & once or twice as if conscious of a peculiar feeling when I
looked at her. (2 July 1821)

Anne Lister may be an exceptional case (though one would have
to believe that she was extraordinarily lucky in finding other exceptional cases), and perhaps her lively record of sexual adventures in a

Paris pension is not the best evidence of general attitudes to female

[115]

Strangers
homosexuality. But even in the most famously innocent case of all,

sharp distinctions were made between love and friendship.
In 1778, two Irish gentlewomen put on men’s clothing and ran

away together. Lady Eleanor Butler had received several offers of
marriage but was determined to share her life with her friend Sarah

Ponsonby. The runaways were discovered and brought home. A few

months later they eloped again and found their way to Wales. Their
families relented and granted them an income.

They spent the rest of their lives in a black and white house called
Plas Nevydd outside Llangollen, cultivating their garden, improving
their minds and filling the house with clocks, cabinets and ‘whirligigs

of every shape and hue’. After the departure of an unsatisfactory

footman,

all

the servants and most of the domestic animals were

female, including a little dog called Sapho. To John Lockhart, who

saw them with ‘crop heads’, wearing men’s hats and huge shoes, they
looked like ‘a couple of hazy or crazy old sailors’.
Llangollen was on the road to ^he Welsh ports, and the Ladies

were

by

visited

a

stream of luminaries:

Wordsworth, the Duke of Wellington,

Lady Caroline Lamb,

etc.

For decades, poets

extolled their worthy menage in execrable odes. The general idea was

that the Ladies of Llangollen epitomized Romantic friendship. They

showed

that

two women could contract a ‘marriage’ and

chaste. Eleanor

still

be

and Sarah were famous for being a good example.

The odd couple who went about their humble business and served
tea to visitors

were the acceptable face of that fashionable French

scourge: sapphism.

This was the implicit background to the idealization of the Ladies,
the reason why the word ‘pure’ was so often attached to their friendship, for

example in the odes of Anna Seward:

‘so

pure a shrine’;

permanent as pure’; ‘pure Friendship’s spotless
palm’. Wordsworth’s sonnet ‘To the Lady E. B. and the Hon. Miss
‘sacred Friendship,

R’ (1824) is typical in politely catapulting their liaison into a realm
of impenetrable chastity:

On Deva’s banks, ye have abode so long;
Sisters in love, a love allowed to climb,

Even on this earth, above the reach of Time!

[ii6]

^

Outings

The Ladies themselves, as they appear in Eleanor’s fearsomely
innocuous journal, seem to have expressed their love in serenity and
routine rather than arousal.

Three o’clock dinner. Boiled Pork. Peas pudding. Half-past three my
beloved and I went to the new garden. Freezing hard. I am much
mistaken if there be not a quantity of snow in the sky. I read to my
beloved No. 97 of the Rambler written by Richardson [etc.] (1 February^
1788)

Not everyone however saw them as sexless maids. Hester Thrale
called them ‘damned Sapphists’ and said that no woman would dare

Newydd without a man. Anne Lister
made a pilgrimage to Llangollen in 1822 and could not ‘help thinking that surely it was not platonic. Heaven forgive me, but I look
within myself & doubt.’ Long before Colette described ‘les Dames
de Llangollen’ in Le Pur et Vlmpur (1932) as forerunners of modern
to spend the night at Plas

lesbians, the Ladies of Llangollen joined the pantheon of homosexual

couples. When Byron imagined himself and his beloved John Edle-

stone outshining other famous lovers, he included the Ladies in

‘We shall put Lady E. Butler^ & Miss Ponsonhy to the Blush
& Orestes out of countenance, & want nothing but a Catastrophe
like Nisus & Euryalus, to give Jonathan & David the “go ^y”.’
the list:

Pylades

The Ladies’ marriage has been a bone of contention among social
historians and queer theorists. Eor some, they were simply passionate
friends.

Eor others, the purification of the Ladies of Llangollen is a

case of retrospective censorship. The terms of the debate, and a simple
lack of information, make any final answer impossible. Eurther complications are caused by a tendency to see genital excitement as the

defining feature of a gay relationship - as if passionate love cannot

be expressed in abstinence as well as orgasm. The point was beauti-

made by Colette in Le Pur et Vlmpur. (The italicised phrase
comes from Eleanor’s journal.)
fully

Two women who are very much in love do not avoid physical pleasure,
nor a kind of sensuality that is more diffuse and yet more passionate
than the spasmodic variety. This unresolved, undemanding sensuality
that finds happiness in an

exchanged glance, in an arm around the

[117]

Strangers
shoulder, in the smell of warm wheat that hides in hair - these delights

of constant presence and routine are the source and justification of
their fidelity.

[.

.

.]

Perhaps this love that is said to be an outrage to

love evades the passing seasons and the ebbing of love on condition
that it be governed with invisible severity and kept on a strict diet
.]
- in such a way that by its grace half a century slips away like a day of
[.

.

sweetly enjoyed retirement.

Conflicting modern interpretations are not just a result of 20th-

century sexual
realities.

politics;

they also reflect 18th- and

19th-century

A similar debate existed in the Ladies’ lifetime. Sexual

relations were already sufficiently polarized for people to believe that

the Ladies

must be either one thing or the other. And the Ladies

themselves were aware or became aware of the distinction.

They

were happy to have their manless marriage celebrated in celestial
metaphors, but they reacted sharply when a certain line was crossed.
In July 1790, The General Evening Post published an article under
the

title

‘Extraordinary Female Affection’.

The article praised the

Ladies’ ‘elegance, neatness and taste’, but it also raised the spectre of
sexual identity:

Miss Butler is tall and masculine, she wears always a riding habit,
hangs her hat with the air of a sportsman in the hall, and appears in
all

respects as a young man if we except the petticoats which she still

retains.

Miss Ponsonby, on the contrary, is polite and effeminate, fair and
beautiful.
[...]

Miss Ponsonby does the duties and honours of the house, while Miss
Butler superintends the gardens and the rest of the grounds.
Significantly,

Eleanor and Sarah were enraged by the article and

wanted to sue the newspaper. Like many later couples in the public
eye, they were stung by the journalistic implication. In 1790, ‘Extra-

ordinary Female Affection’ was not an innocent phrase. Eleanor and

Sarah read widely and certainly knew, as did Hester Thrale, that
there were such things as ‘sapphists’ and ‘tribades’. They knew - to

use a later term - that they were being outed.
Fortunately, this had

no lasting effect on their happiness. The

[ii8]

Outings
stream of visitors and their fascination with the Ladies’ extraordinary
purity were undiminished.

The knowing acceptance

described in the

first

part of this

chapter should therefore be distinguished from what only looks like
tolerance.

Most homosexual men and women were able to identify

their feelings as

something quite

distinct

from normal friendship.

Many heterosexual people could make the same distinction and had
a less categorical view

of homosexuality than the legal and medical

literature would suggest. Unfortunately, there is very little good evi-

dence of attitudes among peasants and the working class. Some quiet
voices will never be heard.

The role played by ignorance in the fragile happiness of gay couples
should not be exaggerated. It is of course possible that the theatrical

triumphs of Boulton and Park, the popularity of Oscar Wilde and

Fred Barnes, and the relatively unmolested households of Custine or
Carpenter were the result of widespread naivety. Even so, one would
still

have to exclude from the ranks of the innocent all those - judges,

juries,

policemen,

relatives,

preachers,

journalists,

schoolteachers,

friends,

inhabitants of large cities and a few hundred thousand

homosexual men and women - who knew the difference between
passion and friendship.

This was hardly a golden age for gay people. The references and
examples available in the 21st century, the

fruitful

complications

and public campaigns for legal and social reform were unknown and,
to most people, unimaginable.

No one was compelled by etiquette to

make a show of tolerance. Calls for legal reform were inspired by
horror of cruelty rather than by sympathy for a sexual minority. There
was some awareness that different societies had different notions of
sex and some debate about the possibly innate nature of homosexuality, but there is little sign that these ideas were in a sufficiently

focused state to influence popular perceptions.

Naivety could always be sustained when necessary, and there was
probably more ignorance about some aspects of sexual life - and more
opportunities for feigning ignorance. At the

trial

in

1811 of two

Edinburgh schoolmistresses accused of having sex within earshot of

[119]

Strangers
one of their boarders, the famously naive view was expressed that the
ladies

must be innocent of the nameless crime because it is ‘even

doubtful if it can exist’. But the transcripts clearly show that all six
judges knew that two women could satisfy each other sexually. (The

testimony of the aggrieved pupil was explicit enough.) The question
was: should the court be seen to believe that such things were
possible?

Most evidence of Victorian naivety turns out to be dubious. The
tale that Queen Victoria thought it futile to legislate against lesbian
sex because no such thing was possible dates from the late 1970s
and proves the exact opposite of what it was supposed to prove. The
fact that this

canard is widely believed shows that we can be just

as naive about the 19th century, not to mention the period in which

we live. Victorian pornography shows that almost everything to do
with sex had already been thought of and could be conveyed to the
reader with the minimum of explanation and often with a good deal

of humour.

Recent attempts to recover the gay past have been characterized by
a desire to avoid anachronistic thinking and to show how unexpectedly

influential society is in shaping sexuality. But to draw an international

date line between 21st-century sexualities and those of the Victorians
is

itself an exercise in

anachronism. Simply to identify differences is

not to avoid anachronism.

Many things were surprisingly similar.

There was the same heterosexual preoccupation with anal intercourse,
the same readiness to make exceptions for personal acquaintances and
‘characters’, the same tyrannical double standard.
Nineteenth-century Europeans and Americans made sense of their

world in their own ways. They were not necessarily stunted by a
dearth of information.

Most people were more familiar than their

21st-century descendants with what Balzac called ‘the Underside of

Contemporary History’. A greater proportion of their knowledge
came in the unprocessed and more potent form of personal acquaintance. Aspects of life that would later be confined to institutions were
displayed in the street and in the home. Their prejudices were pitted
against stranger and more urgent realities than those of their great-

great-grandchildren.

The tactical hypocrisy of the Victorians should not be seen as

[l20]

Outings
purposeful repression.

Discrepancies between public and private

They were
the gaps in an apparently united front. What Iris Murdoch wrote in
opinions were signs of confusion and internal debate.

1964 was just as true 100 years before: ‘The facts that will cure this
prejudice belong to the ordinary talk of ordinary people’.

[I2I]

'rtV

*f*?

M4

<'

•-

;-,-

.

r?w.v,;

'

.1

L

’

;o

V>”

:-Sl'^'
-

'i*

>l
''

’

•

..,.,L.

:>Srr»;*t.-:^

V ,'ij
,.

^

pi^..

•'

‘S'"’'

»

Wk'.v, '...•,

^

*" '^

V

.

..j\<>ii

rriT

'

.

-

t:-.-^

4j

'<

- :’--- ymw^ -

•

- wft

.fl#
.

'V

V-

irt'J'/'' ;>'. tJiS-,',

.

1

'1*<

.'

;

•;

I

,

'

•

•-

•;•

-;

ifc. '.Mifc'L»«i. '

i

V '•Ki

^

'wni

.(;

'

'.ii^J.iWnsiiiH.

?|

j

If., tv

^’

'

'••'
'

-

'

k'^

--

Cvp*!)*''

Sm "

'

'*';>’-’

" '7

'fl ‘:Pl

‘•'JM

'.

.,

Part Two

5

Miraculous Love

The driver pulled up at a place near the boulevard. Father
Pirard ushered Julien into a suite of spacious salons. Julien

noticed that there was no furniture.

He was looking at a

magnificent gilded clock, representing a subject which
struck

him

as

highly

indecent,

when

a

very

elegant

gentleman came up to him in a friendly fashion. Julien

made a slight bow.

The gentleman smiled and placed his hand on Julien
shoulder. Julien gave a start and

’s

jumped backwards, red

with anger. Father Pirard, for all his gravity, laughed until

he wept. The gentleman was a tailor.
Stendhal, Le Rouge et le Noir (1830), II, 2

We felt to each other at once. The night was very stormy
Walt had his blanket - it was thrown round his
shoulders - he seemed like an old sea-captain. He was the
[...].

only passenger, it was a lonely night, so I thought I would

go and talk with him. Something in me made me do it and

something in him drew me that way. [. .] Anyway, I went
into the car. We were familiar at once - I put my hand on
.

knee - we understood. He did not get out at the end
of the trip - in fact went all the way back with me.

his

Peter Doyle, on first meeting Walt Whitman, c. 1865-66

[125]

Strangers

T

he first part of this book has lingered in the shadows of
oppression. The second part describes a long journey towards

the light.

Some people fell by the wayside; others never made the

journey at all; but very few were only passive victims of prejudice.

They fell in love and were rarely as wretched as they were supposed
to be. In some places, they had their own societies and institutions,
and their own culture.
The miserly acceptance described in the last chapter was of little
practical use in

pity or

any case. Seasoned, as it usually was, with distaste,

amusement, it could be worse than open hostility.

September 1876, Pyotr

Ilyich

On 28

Tchaikovsky wrote to his brother

Modest about his Vices’ and their sister Alexandra:
I

know that she guesses everything and forgives everything. Thus am I
by very many people whom I love or respect. Do you really

treated

think that I am not oppressed by this awareness that they pity and forgive

me, when in fact I am guilty of nothing! [.

.

.]

In a word, I should like

by my marriage or, in general, an open affair with a woman to shut
the mouths of various contemptible creatures whose opinion I do not

value in the least but who can cause pain to people close to me.

Gay history is full of opportunities to see men trying to cope with
experiences more common in women’s lives: the vain attempt to ward
off condescension, the urge to conform out of weariness or in a spirit

of self-destructive revenge, the unfair responsibility for other people’s
pain, the sense of inevitable exclusion. Some part of the mind always

agreed with society. It would have taken an unusually independent

person - homosexual or heterosexual - to ignore the majority and to
delete precisely from his upbringing only those elements that stood
in the

way of his happiness. Tchaikovsky, according to his brother,

‘could not help submitting to the influence of the general detestation

of this very defect’.
In the year of Swan Lake (1877), Tchaikovsky married a mentally

The marriage was a disaster. ‘Various
manipulations’ failed to generate a sex-life. They separated after a

unbalanced music student.

few weeks. Tchaikovsky worried that his wife would try to blackmail
him. His friend Nikolai Bochechkarov helped him to find relief with

[126]

Miraculous Love
servants

and male

prostitutes.

‘Sublime’,

Platonic

feelings

were

reserved for people of Tchaikovsky’s own class.

Like the swans that become human again for a few hours after
midnight, Tchaikovsky came out, but only in certain settings - in

Bohemian St Petersburg, or on ‘Bulatov’s country estate’, which was
‘nothing but a pederastic bordello’: ‘As if it were not enough that I
had been there, I fell in love as a cat with his coachman!!!’
Tchaikovsky came closer than almost any other public figure to
living an openly homosexual life, but society ensured that the beloved

composer would remain in the closet. After his death, knowledge of
his homosexuality spread beyond St Petersburg, but a counter-legend
soon repaired the damage. The Symphonie pathHique was supposed
to prove that, if Tchaikovsky

was homosexual, at least he had the

decency to be miserable about it. He was, as the German biographer
of Brahms put it in 1930, ‘inwardly torn by the tragedy of his
unhappy disposition’. The groundless story that Tchaikovsky did ‘the
decent thing’ and shot himself is more widely accepted now than it
was a 100 years ago. In fact, he died of cholera or from resulting
complications. The ‘pathetique’ of his title (pateticheskaya) means
‘impassioned’ rather than ‘sad’, and it was not his last work.

Even for Tchaikovsky, the benevolent blind eye was hardly congenial. Reactions might have varied, but their diversity made it hard

to find a lasting relationship with the rest of society. ‘Coming out’ is

never a single moment, like a debutantes’ ball or a bar mitzvah. The
process has to be repeated indefinitely, and there is no corresponding
ritual of acceptance from the other side.

The commonest solution was not to come out at all. Gay people
who come out are still in the minority, but in the 19th century, with
the unique exception of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, there is not a single

example of someone publicly declaring their homosexuality.

The basic problem was not a lack of courage or a sense of shame
but the gulf between homosexual and heterosexual experience. Unlike
gender, sexuality was not considered a determining feature of social
identity.

Ulrichs himself could not simply disclose his sexuality.

When he came out to the Congress of German Jurists in 1867 (see
[127]

Strangers
p.

182),

he was forearmed with a rational theory of sexuality and a

programme of legal reform that allowed him to reveal himself in
terms that were comprehensible and even reassuring to his audience.

For most people, revealing their true selves would have been a
waste of time. They would be describing something - like smallpox
or colour-blindness - that was not thought to be constituent of a
‘true self. Apart from a few examples of cross-dressing -

women who

fought as soldiers or served as seamen - tales of ‘coming out’ in the
19th century rarely have anything to do with sex. They either involve
a declaration

of principles or they imply some kind of imposture: a

person could ‘come out’ as an illegitimate child, a foreigner, an exconvict or a parvenu; but a declaration of abnormal preference was
unlikely to be construed as a courageous act of social authenticity.

Heterosexuals still tend to see coming out as a kind of attentionseeking exercise that belongs to the same category of discourse as the

bumper-sticker or the T-shirt. People who take their relationship

with society for granted are not always able to understand an attempt
renegotiate

to

a

relationship

with something that seems

quite

abstract as long as it remains approving. Nowadays, explanations and

examples are widely available. A hundred years ago, there was practi-

The image of a ‘closet’ would have seemed strangely
innocuous to most gay people. When Edmund Gosse described the
cally nothing.

predicament of the closet gay, he used an image that had more to do
with Gothic horror than domestic furniture:

The position of a young person so tormented is really that of a man
buried alive & conscious, but deprived of sleep. He is doomed by his
own timidity and ignorance to a repression which amounts to death.
[.

.

.]

This corpse, however, is obliged to bustle around and make an

appearance every time the feast of life is spread.
*

Most acts of coming out were confined to the microcosm of
Even then they were quite rare. Only one of Havelock
Ellis’s interviewees had come out to his family, and though the family
the family.

was not uniformly hostile, anyone who read his account might have
been dissuaded from trying the experiment for themselves:

Miraculous Love
Two years ago I told my parents about my sexual condition. It was a
frightful blow to them.

My father had the circumstances explained to

him; he never understood the matter and never discussed it with me.

Had I told him earlier I feel quite certain that, with his despotic nature,
he would have put me in a madhouse. My mother and sister have
treated me very kindly always.

My brother has disowned me.

Sometimes, seeds of awareness in the family could be nurtured or
forced. Lytton Strachey engaged his

mother in an argument about

the homosexuality of Shakespeare. Joe Ackerley, exasperated by his

mother’s references to ‘Miss Right’, lectured her on Otto Weininger’s

theory of a sexual continuum. Mikhail

Kuzmin told his mother

everything after trying to kill himself: ‘She became affectionate and
candid, and we would chat for hours on end during the night or in

the evening over a

game of piquet’, though, ‘for some reason or

other’, only in French.

All three men were specialists in self-expression and, crucially, none

of them had a wife. Nearly all the happy tales of coming out within
the family involved parents and their children rather than husbands

and wives. Magnus Hirschfeld (1905) and Edward Prime-Stevenson
(1908) published some encouraging anecdotes about understanding
parents. Hirschfeld even knew a mother who hoped that her second

son would turn out to be homosexual because the

first

son had

contracted a venereal disease. But most of Hirschfeld’s patients were
strangers in their own families. Christmas, for them, was not a cele-

bration of family unity, it was the time of year when they reached for
the revolver or the phial of prussic acid.
Usually, when the truth was known, it was not divulged, it seeped

out or was revealed by accident. Three of Krafft-Ebing’s patients

knew that they had a homosexual brother or sister, but apparently
did not discuss the matter.

The five patients who had discussed it

were all women. Three were referred to the doctor by a worried
husband, one by a guardian ‘because she ran away from home in
men’s clothing in order to wander the world and become an “artist” ’,

and one by some relatives who saw her return from a spa wearing
short hair and riding-boots, talking in a deep voice and pining for a

woman.

Strangers

None of the men in Krafft-Ebing’s casebook found it hard to
was a lesbian. The experience was traumatic
none the less, especially for the women. The young wife of a factorybelieve that his wife

owner, ‘Frau von T.’, had warned her husband before marrying him
that she was a lesbian and that ‘she esteemed him only for his intellectual qualities’. She endured sexual intercourse by imagining that her
husband was a woman. Herr von T. had taken her to the doctor after
a catastrophic

dinner party: ‘In the drawing-room, after dinner, she

flung her arms around one of the ladies, kissing and caressing her,

and thereby caused a scandal.’
Frau von T. might have come out to her husband, but she was
quickly pushed back in again. After a course of hydrotherapy and

hypnotism, designed to give her ‘a respectable or at least a sexually
neutral personality’, she returned to live with her relatives. ‘She has

been there for some time now and is conducting herself in a very
proper fashion.’

There is some evidence - but not very much - of ‘lavender marriages’ in which both partners were gay, like Vita Sackville-West and

Harold Nicolson, for whom fidelity in marriage meant telling each
other the truth, though it took a long time for them to discover the
truth about themselves. Some people reached a practical agreement,

thanks in part to low expectations of marriage.

The lesbian sister

of the woman who wrecked the dinner party gave her husband his
‘freedom’ and paid him not to have sex with her. An army doctor

had a similarly frank relationship with his wife, whom he called his
‘Raphael’. The couple had managed to have four sons, but then gave

‘My wife knows my mental state. Her kindness and love allow
her to make light of it.’
Coming out within a marriage was the closest thing to finding a

up.

compromise with society. Both partners could, in theory, enjoy the
benefits of respectability without stifling their desires. But these ‘new
marriages’ could hardly be described as ideal. The paragon of openness in this respect is Edith Lees,

1891, then

fell

who married Havelock Ellis in

in love with an old friend

and explained it all to

Havelock with every expectation that he would understand. Marriage
gave her the freedom and security to pursue several other relationships with women, but the Ellises were forced to summon up all their

[130]

Miraculous Love
ideological seriousness to survive. Convention was not a barrier that

could simply be pushed to one side. Ellis described the sad dilemma
in

My Life (1916):
As soon as she perceived this new emotional outflow towards her
old friend Claire (as I will call her) she wrote to tell me of it with all

her native trustful confidence, simple, direct and spontaneous.

[.

.

.]

But, after all, I was human. There remained beneath the surface the

consciousness of a flaw in the ideal of married love

I

had so

far

cherished, and a secret wound of the heart ‘not so deep as a well nor

so wide as a church door’,* but

enough to kill that conception of

mutual devotion in marriage.
[.

.

.]

I

remained her ‘boy’, her ‘child’, always her ‘comrade’, and

‘the one person in the world who understands me’.

Gay love has its ‘martyrs’, but so does the love that suddenly finds
itself without

an object. These experiences could fill another book:

seemed a loving relationalbum - wives and husbands,

the subtle impoverishment of what had
the faces in the photograph

ship,

children and parents - suddenly replaced by strangers. The misery

caused by the ban on homosexual love was not peculiar to homosexual

men and women. Constance Wilde was never the adorable innocent
of Oscar’s dreams, and Madeleine Gide was repeatedly crushed by
the juggernaut of Andre’s quest for ‘authenticity’. As he acknowledged
after

her death, she knew from various articles that he was homo-

sexual, but ‘carefully hid

from me the sufferings they might have

caused her’. Gide had convinced himself that respectable women had
no sexual desires and that Madeleine would be happier living with a

man who had satisfied his own. ‘Until Les Faux Monnayeurs [1926],
everything I wrote was an attempt to convince her and persuade her.
It was

nothing but a long speech for the defence.’ This speech had

an audience of millions but it was never made to Madeleine herself.

In this world of slow deaths by mutual deception, the systematic
self-revelation of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

*

is

an amazing exception.

Romeo and Juliet, III, 1 (Mercutio describing his fatal wound.)
.

Strangers
There is nothing to compare with his campaign for recognition until
the public statements of Edward Carpenter and Andre Gide. Even
so, Carpenter and Gide declared themselves on paper and were
protected to some extent by age and reputation. Carpenter made
his first direct statement when he was seventy-two, in

My Days and

Dreams (1916). Gide’s awkward ‘defence of pederasty’, Corydon (1911,
1920 and 1924), was confessional only by implication. His first
unambiguous statement was published when he was fifty-seven, in
Si le grain ne meurt (1926).

Karl Heinrich Ulrichs (1825-95) had qualified as a jurist and served
the state of Hanover for six years. In 1854, he resigned for an

unknown reason, perhaps connected with his homosexuality, and
worked as a freelance journalist. By now, quite certain that his attraction to

men was innate and not perverse, he had decided to share

his knowledge with the world. Attempts to discuss the matter at the

Scientific Institute in Erankfurt led to his membership being removed

in 1859. Perhaps it was this that encouraged him to refine his argu-

ments in a family debate.
Karl’s sister Ulricke and her husband, a pastor, already knew about
his oddness. Ulricke’s views can be deduced from the letter Karl sent

to her on 22 September 1862. She was asked to send the letter on to
six other members of the family:

My dear sister, it is ABSOLUTELY IMPOSSIBLE for me to love
even the most beautiful of women. [.

.

.]

No one can make himself\JDMY.

a particular person or sex by sheer willpower. I have ALWAYS been this
way. If you were right, I would once have felt at least a glimmer of
love for Dorette K, Auguste H., Louischen U, or one of the many

other young girls I danced with. [.

.

.]

There was no reason in the world for me to say, ‘Oh, if only I could
love a girl!’ When I danced with the ladies and paid court to them, I

was simply fulfilling the demands of politeness. And even then, Aunt
U. and others had to keep reminding me, ‘You must be nice to the
ladies.’

[.

.

.]

Dear sister, I never said that I had a general aversion to women; my
aversion concerns only sexual love. [.

.

.]

So you are really quite mistaken when you exclaim, ‘Oh, if only you
had never gone to Berlin!’

[132]

Miraculous Love
Ulricke had considered the matter carefully and was more bemused

Her husband the
pastor and a man called Ludewig agreed with St Paul that homothan hostile, unlike some of the other relatives.

sexuality was a perversion. Wilhelm Ulzen called it ‘devilish madness’,

and Uncle Wilhelm thought that Karl should be sent to prison or an
asylum.

The next stage was to send a second letter to the same eight people.
Karl was proposing to publish his findings in a pamphlet and asked
for the family’s opinion. This historic document was dated Frankfurt,

28 November 1862, and marked ‘For circulation and return as soon
as possible’. The tone was ironically reminiscent of St Paul:

My dear ones,
now have reason to hope that in a short time from now there will

I

be light between you, my nearest and dearest, and myself.
[.

.

.]

Uranism is innate, but not in the sense that ‘sinful proclivities’

are innate, as Sister U. has been maintaining, or like ‘pyromania’, as

Wilhelm contended in a manner which I must say was a little unkind.
[.

.

The Uranian is a species of man-woman. Uranism is a natural

.]

anomaly, a trick of Nature of which there are thousands of examples
in Creation.
[.

.

.]

The Dioning [heterosexual] majority has no right whatsoever

to make human society exclusively Dioning.

Most of the stunned recipients managed a response. Two of the
men opposed Karl’s plan to publish on the grounds that it would not
further his interests.
exist,

Wilhelm Ulzen thought that ‘if such people

they should start a society of their own’. Ulricke ’s husband

deemed the pamphlet ‘inadvisable’, gave up the struggle as ‘hopeless’
and begged to be spared any further disquisitions: ‘May God bring
about what men apparently cannot.’
Old Uncle U. also advised against publication but said that he
would suspend judgement until he saw the proofs of the article. ‘It
saddens me, dear Karl, that you persist in justifying something that
I

am convinced cannot be justified. Auntie and Karl send their

greetings.’

Considering the fact that Karl was intending to publish his views.

[133]

Strangers
the family handled it quite well. Of course, at this stage, they were

assuming that he would remain safely anonymous.

In 1862, Ulrichs was already several steps beyond the no-man’sland in which most of his fellow Uranians spent their lives. By coming

out to himself, he had already conquered the greatest obstacle of all.

Few people came out in private without first negotiating the maze
of self-deception. The early awareness described by most gay men

and women was nearly always retrospective. It was only after falling
in love or failing to satisfy a wife or a

husband that they allowed

themselves to interpret their childhood ‘abnormalities’ as symptoms
of homosexuality. J. A. Symonds tried to ‘stimulate a romantic feeling

women’ by looking at pictures of Josephine Butler and Jenny
Lind, and ‘coaxed up’ some emotion for a fifteen-year-old Swiss girl.
for

Andre Gide lost his virginity to an Arab boy but still refused to
acknowledge his ‘instincts’ and made a vain ‘attempt at “normalization”

’

with a beautiful Arab girl.

One of the commonest forms of self-deception used the association
of homosexuality with effeminacy: the homosexual Baron de Coubertin’s re-creation of the Olympic Games in

1

896 was a celebration

of virtuous masculinity (women were excluded), as were the early

German youth movements. Bernarr Macfadden, whose body-building
magazine delighted several generations of gay men

Physical Culture

with its muscly male nudes, saw himself as the nemesis of ‘perverts’

- those

‘shoals of painted,

perfumed. Kohl-eyed,

lisping,

mincing

youths that at night swarm on Broadway in the Tenderloin section,
or haunt the parks and 5 th avenue, ogling every man that passes and
- it is pleasant to relate - occasionally getting a sound thrashing or

an emphatic kicking’, as he put it in Superb Virility of Manhood (1904).

He would have been appalled to see his works advertised in the gay
sections of online bookstores.

Walt Whitman used the equation of feebleness with perversion to
remind his readers that there was nothing unhealthy about ‘robust
American love’. ‘Powerful Matrons’ abound in Leaves of Grass, though

most of them sound more like ancient Greek athletes than Manhattan
housewives:

Miraculous Love
[.

.

.]

I will

be the robust husband of those women.

They are not one jot less than I am,
They are tann’d in the face by shining suns and blowing winds,
Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength.

They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike,
retreat, advance, resist,

defend themselves.

They are ultimate in their own right

[.

.

.]

Minds are always at their most inventive when fleeing from the
truth. The self-awareness of homosexual diarists and autobiographers

the more remarkable. Diaries were a means of coming out to

is all

oneself and to the future. For people who had no access to homosexual

groups, a relationship with posterity was better than no relationship
at all.

The Finnish writer, suffragette and cyclist, Hilda Maria Kakikoski
(1864-1912), wrote an unsent letter on ‘the secret motive’ behind

women’s relationships ‘which the world cannot see’. Minnie Benson
(1841-1918), wife of the Archbishop of Canterbury and mother of
three homosexual sons, composed the record of her love for Lucy
Tait as if in the gloom of a deserted confessional, but the fact that
the diary survived suggests that she had a wider audience in mind.

The Swedish philosopher, Carl Pontus Wikner (1837-88), left his
diaries to the Uppsala medical faculty,

along with his ‘Psychological

Confessions’ (1879), in which he defended the right of homosexuals
to marry.

The confessions were not to be published until after the

death of his children. When he launched this message in a bottle,

he could hardly have known how many other bottles would wash up

on the distant shore:
You, man, who read these lines, they are written to you by a brother

who has suffered much. My thoughts are wrung from the deepest
distress, yet still

they try to find expression. O, that you could and

would understand me! Some people are capable of deep, heartfelt, selfsacrificing love, yet the only possible object of their love

is

a person

of their own sex. There are said to be such women, and I know that

such men exist. I myself am such a man. These confessions contain a
life

of anguish.

There is a whole virtual gay literature of the 19th century that

[135]

Strangers
remained unread
texts

until the late 20th.

Most of these time-capsule

were discovered and read only when time had rendered them

innocuous. Wikner’s ‘confessions’ were published in 1971, in the same
year as Forster’s Maurice, written in 1913-14 and dedicated ‘To a

Happier Year’. Ackerley’s My Father and Myself appeared in 1968, the
year after the law changed in England and Wales. Both works were

published posthumously.
Texts that did appear in their author’s lifetime were often privately

printed for a handful of friends, like the poems of Constantine Cavafy.

Other texts were simply consigned to oblivion. As a young man,

Symonds locked his early poems in a black tin box, then gave the key
to his friend Henry Sidgwick, who threw it into the river Avon.
The few writers whose works left the closet and who were recognized as homosexual issued denials whenever someone tried to state
the obvious. Walt Whitman had learned to stop worrying about his
fluctuating, useless undignified pursuit of 16

A - too long

(much too long) persevered in’ and enjoyed a love affair of many years
with Peter Doyle (16.4 = P.D.) - ‘a great big hearty full-blooded

everyday divinely generous working man’. But when Symonds naively
asked him to clarify his position on ‘the intimate and physical love

of comrades and lovers’. Whitman not surprisingly pulled down the
blinds. After being pestered for almost twenty years,

he finally gave

an answer on 19 August 1890:
Ab’t the questions on Calamus pieces* &c: they quite daze me. L of

G. [Leaves of Grass] is only to be rightly construed by and within its
- that the calamus part
[.
.]

own atmosphere & essential character

.

has even allow’d the possibility of such construction as mention’d is
terrible - I

am fain to hope the pp [pages] themselves are not to be

even mention’d for such gratuitous and quite

undream’d &

at the

time entirely

unreck’d possibility of morbid inferences - wh’ are dis-

avow’d by me & seem damnable.
After locking away his poems. Whitman went on to say that, ‘though

unmarried’, he had sired six children, two of whom were dead - and

none of whom, of course, has ever been identified.
*

A section of Leaves of Grass expressing ‘the beautiful and sane affection of man

for man’. Whitman calls the phallic calamus-root ‘the token of comrades’.

1^36]

Miraculous Love

The Belgian novelist Georges Eekhoud effectively came out before
the end of the century. He published articles defending homosexuality and was mentioned as a homosexual writer in Iwan Bloch’s Das

Sexuallehen unsere Zeit (Berlin, 1907). But when he was asked in 1909
to declare himself in a

German review, Sexuale Prohleme, he took

refuge in scholarship and humanitarian concern:
I have never professed or confessed to homosexuality. It was objectively,

as a novelist, that I studied that interesting variety

of pauper and

outcast (cast out by society, not by nature), and the concern I feel for

them would have been sanctioned by the Gospels.
Self-censorship was a practical necessity, but it was also part of the

process of self-discovery, which makes

it

doubly unreasonable to

accuse writers like Proust or James of failing to support the cause.

Far more damage was done by the mutilations and incinerations of

embarrassed readers.

A diarist might turn his closet into a time-

machine, but when it arrived in the future heirs and editors would
be waiting to barricade the doors.

Some crude attempts at censorship are easily reversed - hims
replaced with hers, and so on - but a great deal of the unread corpus

was destroyed for

ever.

Edmund Gosse and the librarian of the

London Library organized Symonds’ papers into a pile in the library
garden and set fire to them. Richard Burton’s extensive research notes

on ‘pederasty’ were probably destroyed by his widow. Minnie Benson’s
son Arthur left behind ‘a packet of letters of very dangerous stuff’

and another packet ‘that had to be burnt unopened’, according to his
brother Fred. Edward Lear’s papers seem to have been selectively
destroyed after his death by the man for whom Lear had harboured
a ‘thwarted, frustrated, impossible love’.

To judge by the large number of known destructions (most presumably went unrecorded), at any moment in the 19th century someone,

somewhere, was burning the papers of a homosexual relative. People

who were almost certainly homosexual, like Thomas Gray or Thomas
Lovell Beddoes, can now have no firm place in the record, especially
since the standard of proof demanded of biographers
for

homosexual than for heterosexual

subjects.

It

is

is

far stricter

almost

as

if

the surviving testimonies to forbidden love were written 2,000 years

[137]

Strangers
rather than four or five generations ago. Ancient Greek literature and

19th-century confessional gay literature probably survive in approxi-

mately the same proportions.
•

*

By gathering the evidence in one place, books like this tend to
depict the Oceania of remote islands as a busy continent with wellestablished trade routes. Most writing on the subject - like the scene

from Le Rouge et le Noir quoted as an epigraph to this chapter - was
swathed in subtlety and would simply have passed unnoticed.

Most people came out to themselves, not in careful reading, but
in unexpected moments and chance encounters. The vital moment
could occur at school, in the armed forces, in other countries, or in
cities

where homosexual

prostitutes,

male and female, plied their

trade (which accounts for most big cities in
Institutions

Europe and America).

were especially important because they showed that

homosexual relations could have a social context, however unpleasant.
Information was suppressed, but

it

was

also

freely disseminated.

Schoolboys were lectured on ‘filth’, schoolgirls were warned about
inappropriate physical intimacy. The Austrian army gave its soldiers

-

regular briefings

on homosexuality. French

especially ‘those

who were endowed with a pretty face’ - ‘had to

reject

the

disgusting propositions

soldiers in Algeria

of the Algerians’.

Confessors’

manuals, like the Llave de Oro - ‘for opening the hearts of poor
sinners’ (Barcelona, 1857-83) - revealed the existence of homosexual
attraction. They also contained lists of anatomically precise questions

that might have inspired even the most experienced sinners.

Some men were alerted to their inclinations by a perceptive prostitute or girlfriend. A surprising number of people claimed to owe their
enlightenment to animals: a woman known to Havelock Ellis ‘had
no idea at first that homosexual attractions in women existed’, but
then ‘observations on the lower animals put the idea into my head’.

Many people discovered their homosexuality only when the person
they loved had gone away or died.
*

[138]

Miraculous Love

Once the hurdle of self-awareness had been overcome, the next
step

was to find

a

like-minded person. This was nearly always a

dangerous affair. A man who approached the wrong person might be
arrested, beaten up, blackmailed or disgraced.
Inevitably, the cases that

came to public attention tended to be

untypically dramatic: men mistaken for women, politicians ambushed
in urinals,

and so on. Most fiascos took place in private. Delicate

friendships were destroyed

by declarations of love or by the mere

suspicion of homosexuality.

Hans Christian Andersen’s infatuation

with his friend Edvard Collin lasted for years and never reached a

happy resolution. When Collin told him to stop using the intimate
‘Du’ form, Andersen declared his love instead for Collin’s sister and

pretended to be a new man:
I

do not think that I am as passionate and soft as I used to be - that

was a mistake and has been corrected. I wonder whether you will like

me better?
Collin made a concession by offering to play an occasional game of
chess, then closed the door for ever by getting married. Karl Heinrich

Ulrichs seems to have suffered a similar misfortune. For a long time,

he believed that Uranians could only

fall

in love with

Dionings

(heterosexuals).

The slow evolution of a friendship could hide a truth that seemed
obvious in retrospect. In his twenties. Platen had become quite physically intimate with a young student called Schmidtlein. They sat on
a

park bench, amorously entwined and discussing art. Schmidtlein

had read about romantic friendship and felt guilty that he could ‘never
feel the holy flame of friendship in

my breast’. Finally, after one kiss

too many, it dawned on him that Platen was a monster: ‘From now
on, I will avoid you like the plague.’

Embarrassing moments like this were a staple of moralistic British
novels in which the repressed young man tried to enjoy his brotherly
passion without ‘soiling’ himself. In the Memoirs of Arthur Hamilton^
B.A. (1886) by Arthur Benson, the ‘silent and languid’ Arthur exemplifies

the process of slowly coming out and suddenly going back in

again:

[139]

Strangers
Arthur seems not to have suspected it at first, and to have delighted
in his friend’s society; but such things as habits betray themselves, and

my belief is that disclosures were made on November 8, which revealed
to Arthur the state of the case. What passed I cannot say. I can hardly

picture to myself the agony, disgust, and rage (his words and feelings

about sensuality of any kind were strangely keen and bitter), loyalty
fighting with the sense of repulsion, pity struggling with honour, which
must have convulsed him when he discovered that his friend was not

only yielding, but deliberately impure.

There is nothing like the po-faced English male romance to show
the comic potential of illicit love. The wandering poet Albert Glatigny

(1839-73) had a song on the subject that would have horrified the

honourable Arthur. A man is asked why he has stopped seeing his
friend Durand. He recalls the jolly times they had together: Durand,

the joker, used to masturbate him and, just for a laugh, ‘he ejaculated
in

my arse’. (‘I laughed until I wept, I must confess.’)
‘‘Mais nous avons rompu.

Nous sommes

b7vuilles a mort. ’

'Qu 'a-t-il done fait?

’

^On m^a dit quHl Hait pour hommes!"*

Even if both partners turned out to be homosexual, the taboo could
be just as effective. Love did not always have the last word. Many
one-sided affairs survived the moment of realization only by mutual
self-deception. In

Venus Urania (1798), the Hanoverian diplomat

Eriedrich von Ramdohr told the bitter-sweet tale of two men who met
in a famous German academy. (One was probably Ramdohr himself.)

They lived together and seldom parted.

[.

.

.]

A subtle fire ran

through their veins at every accidental touch.^ Whenever they caught
sight of one another unexpectedly, they were filled with inexplicable
rapture. They stayed up all night together, and when the grey light of

dawn forced them to seek the rest that the excited mind refused the
exhausted body, their farewells continued on the doorstep in conversations that lasted hours.

*

[.

.

.]

‘But now we’ve broken up and we’re deadly enemies.’ / ‘What did he do?’ / ‘They

told me that he’s homosexual!’
^

Allusion to Sappho: ‘Swiftly through all my veins a subtle fire runs’ (tr. Bantock).

Miraculous Love
But those days soon disappeared like a beautiful dream! [.

.

.]

Such

crude symptoms of physical sexual sympathy manifested themselves in

both men that these chaste and innocent (but not ignorant) young men

were enlightened in a terrible way about the workings of unforeseen
desires.

They separated with a start, and that moment in which two

souls appeared in

all

their purity seemed to

them to be the blackest

stain on their lives. In that instant, their passion ended. It was even-

tually replaced by tenderness founded on respect.

Sometimes - ‘crude symptoms of physical sexual sympathy’ notwithstanding - the point of realization was never reached. Novelists
and doctors described homosexual relationships as if nothing could
stop them, but it is almost a miracle that they ever started. In Sodome
et

Gomorrhe, Proust likened the coming together of two ‘inverts’ to

the unlikely process by which a rare orchid in a Paris courtyard
is

pollinated by a Parisian bumble-bee.

The seemingly impossible

conjunction of flower and bee was not just a reference to lack of
opportunities. Most of the obstacles to homosexual love were invisible.

Ramdohr’s reluctant lovers had no immediate, rational context,

other than their own desires, in which to place their love. Irrational

needs were not instantly translated into recognized forms of social
behaviour.

A whole society silently cheered on the heterosexual suitor,

whereas homosexual people had to conduct their business in a void.

The separation of homosexual love from accepted norms explains
why so many attempts to find a structure for that love seem so
humorously incongruous: Joe Ackerley compared his illiterate sailor

Ephebe of Kritios’; Natalie Clifford Barney sailed to
Lesbos with Renee Vivien to found a new school of Sapphic poetesses:
friend to ‘the

As we approached Mitilini, we heard the nasal whine of a gramophone
in the harbour:

‘Come, my little chicken, come to me!’ Renee had

been waiting on the bridge since dawn for this moment. She turned
pale with horror!

Oxford aesthetes adored pimply urchins as incarnations of Ancient
Greece. Frank Harris saw Oscar Wilde one day at the Cafe Royal
telling

two Cockney lads about the Olympic Games:

‘

“Did you sy

they was niked?” “Of course”, Oscar replied, “nude, clothed only in
sunshine and beauty.”

’

[141]

Strangers

The quest for what E. M. Forster called ‘the Greenwood’ - a
special enclave where ‘two men [could] defy the world’ - was always
vulnerable to the irruptions of the day-to-day. Normal reality was a
greater threat than any modern Sheriff of Nottingham. If the miracle

of a physically and emotionally fulfilling friendship occurred, a lastingly miraculous setting had to be found for it. Some of the coteries

and countries described in the next chapter gave a glimmer of the

Greenwood, though, as Ackerley pointed out, ‘what was the good of
making friends in other countries? One wanted them in one’s own,
one wanted them in one’s home.’ Even brothels could give intimations of a better life, precisely because, in Symonds’ words, they were
‘lawless’ and ‘godless’.

Coming out was almost meaningless without some prior rearrangement of the world. While some looked for a utopia where their love
would be simultaneously normal and extraordinary - like Winckelmann in Rome or Oscar Wilde almost anywhere - others looked for
the rationale and vindication of their love in the paranormal. ‘All

“abnormal” sex-acts’, said W. H. Auden, ‘are rites of symbolic magic.’

According to Ulrichs, strange lights had sometimes been seen hovering around the erect penises of men on park benches. Since their
affairs

were acted out against a background of implausibility, it was

almost logical to believe that they were not of this earth.
*

Without paranormal assistance, making contact with a likeminded person was an art that demanded even more finesse than
heterosexual courtship.

The least subtle people learned to be allusive. Ideally, the text ~ of
the conversation or the letter - would function like a metafora di

which two objects are described simultaneously so that
each reading is complete and coherent on its own. Anne Lister pol-

decettione in

ished her love letters as craftily as a poet, adjusting her ambiguities

and measuring out the precise quantity of passion. She analysed one
of her letters to Maria Barlow in her diary: ‘This ought not to be
seen [.

.

.]

Yet there is nothing, I think, I could not manage to explain

away to warm friendship if I had the letter before me & was obliged
to defend myself.’

[142]

Miraculous Love
Charlotte Bronte was just as cautious in her letters to Ellen Nussey,

though the omissions made by Elizabeth Gaskell in her biography
(‘You tantalize
fireside

me to death with talking of conversations by the

and between the blankets ’) and the concerns of Charlotte’s

husband (‘Arthur says such letters as mine never ought to be kept,
they are dangerous as Lucifer matches’) show that no allusion could

be too obscure.
In Christopher Isherwood’s

Mr Norris Changes Trains (1935), Baron

von Pregnitz practises the equally delicate art of ambiguous conversation.

Like the messages of a secret agent, the Baron’s exploratory

talks with the narrator could pass, if need be, as idle chatter:

‘Excuse me. Do you know Naples?’

‘No. I’ve never been there.’
‘Forgive me. I’m sorry. I had the feeling that we’d met each other
before.’

‘Excuse me, you were in London?’
‘Part of the time, yes.’
[...]

‘And, excuse me, how are the Horse Guards?’
‘Still sitting there.’

‘Yes?

I

am glad to hear this, you see. Very glad

.’
.

.

‘Have you read Winnie the Pooh, by A. A. Milne?’
‘Yes, I have.’

‘And tell me, please, how did you like it?’
‘Very much indeed.’

‘Then I am very glad. Yes, so did I. Very much.’

And now we were all standing up. What had happened? It was
midnight. Our glasses touched.

The

shared culture of gay

men and women - their history,

geography, literature, art and music - was not a passive store of

knowledge. It was a vital means of communication. Anne Lister and
her several lovers

made their feelings known by referring to the

rumours about Marie- Antoinette’s lesbian antics and to the small
number of texts in which lesbians were mentioned: Juvenal, Martial,
Ovid, Petronius, Suetonius, the Bible and ‘the Latin parts of the

works of Sir William Jones’. They discussed the sex of the Moon -

[143]

Strangers
female in some countries, male in others: ‘I smiled & said the moon

had tried both sexes, like old Tiresias, but that one could not make
such an observation to every one.’ A woman in Anne Lister’s Paris

pension passed her a note alluding to the period during which Achilles
dressed as a woman, and seduced King Lycomedes’ daughter:
‘I

have a question to ask you. Etes-vous Achilles?’ I laughed & said

she made me blush. [.

.

.]

She said I was the only one in the house to

whom she could have written it, because the only one who would have
so soon understood it.

Men enjoyed a wider range of reference and were more likely to
be able to find cheerful examples of male love: Achilles and Patroclus
in

The Iliad, the Theban band of warrior-lovers in Plutarch, Nisus

and Euryalus in the Aeneid. References to Alexander the Great,
Michelangelo, Frederick II and other eminent figures were increasingly understood as references to homosexuality. From the 1860s, in
Britain and America,

Walt Whitman was probably the commonest

key to further intimacy, the ‘password primeval’ that could be ‘flashed
out’ ‘to such as alone could understand’.* Eventually, books on homo-

sexual love - William Johnson’s versions of Greek and Latin in lonica
(1858), Carpenter’s loldus: An Anthology of Friendship (1902) - could

be given as presents and tokens.

This furtive erudition was not entirely confined to cultured milieux.
It

could be found even in the stocking shop of the Western Peni-

of Pennsylvania, where the young anarchist Alexander
Berkman served his sentence from 1892 to 1906. A man called Red
had decided to make Berkman his ‘kid’ (also known as a ‘prushun’ or
tentiary

a ‘punk’):
‘I

don’t know what you are talking about.’
‘I

know you don’t. That’s why I’m goin’ to chaperon you, kid.

[.

.

.]

Moonology, my Marktwainian Innocent, is the truly Christian science
of loving your neighbor, provided he be a nice litde boy. Understand

now?’

*

Richard Le Gallienne’s The Book-Bills of Narcissus (1891), alluding to Whitman’s

‘Song of Myself’, 24: ‘I speak the pass-word primeval [...]/ Through me forbidden
voices; / Voice of sexes and lusts, voices veil’d, and I remove the veil’.

[144]

Miraculous Love
‘How can you love a boy?’
‘Are you really so dumb? You are not a ref[orm school] boy, I can
see that.’

‘Red, if you’d drop your stilted language and talk plainly. I’d under-

stand better.’
‘[.

.

.]

How can a self-respecting gentleman explain himself to you?

But I’ll try. You love a boy as you love the poet-sung heifer, see? Ever
read Billy Shakespeare? Know the place, “He’s neither man nor woman;
he’s punk.”* Well, Billy knew.

A punk’s a boy that’ll

’

‘What!’
‘Yes, sir. Give himself to a man.

Now we’se talkin’ plain. Savvy now.

Innocent Abroad?’

Some of these conversations are a verbal equivalent of the extraordinary dance of gestures and expressions performed by Proust’s

Baron de Charlus in the vicinity of his beloved Jupien, ‘like those
questioning phrases of Beethoven’s, indefinitely repeated at regular
intervals’.

The trick was to build a retraction into the message, just in case.
There are many examples of this two-steps-forward-one-step-back
approach in private letters. Nikolai Gogol wrote to his ‘tall, husky,
and appetizing for the ladies Sobolevsky!’, and offered to ‘sunbathe
in the nude’ with another friend - ‘and in addition I would marry

you off to a pretty girl’. A similar trick consisted of condemning
homosexuality and then watching the reaction. In Siegfried Moldau’s
play,

Wahrheit (‘Truth’) (1907), a family friend broaches the subject

with the Count’s son:

‘Do you know ... do you remember ever hearing about what happened to Platen?’

‘What of it?’
‘That sort of thing, you know, happens more frequendy - even
today - than people realize.’

‘Away with you, Baron! You don’t mean to say that
‘Yes,

*

.’
.

.

my poor boy. I’m afraid I do.’

Cf Measure for Measure, V, 1 ‘Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow,
may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid,
:

nor wife?’ ‘My lord, she
widow, nor wife.’

[145]

Strangers
These superficially innocuous elaborations and interrupted propositions also belong to the syntax of cruising.

When Joe Ackerley went

shopping for partners in London, he performed his circumvolutions

on the pavement instead of on the page:
I

would hasten after him, pass without a glance (in the hope of not

being noticed), and when I had reached what I considered to be an
invisible distance ahead, turn about to retrace
collision. If then I

my steps for a head-on

got a responsive look, a smile, a backward glance,

if he then stopped to stare after

me or to study the goods in the nearest

shop-window (the more incongruous they were the safer I felt) I judged
I

might act, though still with caution in case he was luring me into

some violent trap. The elaborateness of this maneuver often lost me
the boy, he had gone into a house or disappeared up some side turning

behind my back - and therefore remained in my chagrined thought as
the Ideal Friend.
If the

two potential partners already knew about each other, the

degree of elaboration could render the message practically incomprehensible to anyone else. When the schoolboy Arthur Rimbaud sent
a selection

of poems to Verlaine and promised to be

‘less

bother

than a Zanetto’ if Verlaine took him in, no one could accuse him of

making obscene proposals - unless they noticed that all the poems
had something to do with bottoms and knew that the character
Zanetto - a seductive little vagrant played by the boyish Sarah
Bernhardt - was a by-word for ‘pederasty’.
These precautions made it relatively easy for later defenders of
reputations to deny that a person was gay. Bland interpretations were
always available, which, of course, was precisely the point.

Some fine examples of the routine finesse of gay men and women
can be found in a new means of making contact that appeared towards
the end of the century: the classified advertisement. The earliest
example found so far was published in an Austrian newspaper, c. 1880:
Seeking a friend who, like me, enjoys solitude and shuns company,
especially that of women.

Happy indeed the man who suffices unto

himself Happier still the man who has a like-minded friend. Whoever
understands me should write to ‘Mr Nature-Lover’ at the newspaper
offices.

[146]

Miraculous Love
Usually, the merest hint was enough. Without the inside knowledge

of the sexologists who quoted them, some of the advertisements in

German newspapers in the early 1900s would probably have passed
unnoticed:
Elderly gentleman, not a ladies’ man, seeks acquaintance with like-

minded gentleman.

Young family man,

27,

seeks

friendly

relations

with

energetic

gentleman.

Young man of pleasant appearance conversant with many languages
seeks unpaid position as travelling companion. Offers to ‘Uranus’.

Gentleman, 23, seeks friend. Write please to ‘Socrates’.
Lady, 36, desires friendly relations. P.O. 16, ‘Plato’.
Actress with modern views desires to know rich lady with similar views,
for friendly relations, etc.

Even without a tell-tale ‘Plato’, ‘Socrates’ or ‘modern’, the meaning
was apparently quite clear. Richard von Krafft-Ebing and Albert Moll
both claimed that whenever a woman advertised for a female friend,

no doubt about her intentions’. This economy of
expression was shown by experiment in 1901. A homosexual philol‘there could be

ogist in Berlin known only as ‘Dr B.’ submitted a brief advertisement
to thirty-six journals:
[Male] friend, 17-21, seeks doctor, 25.

‘Z’,

Morgenpost, Schiffbauer-

damm, 2.
Eleven journals agreed to publish the text. (The others presumably
understood.) Although it appeared only once, there were 140 replies.

One hundred and eleven respondents were quite open about their
desire for a homosexual relationship.

Whether or not the experiment ended there, we unfortunately
have no further information on Dr B. and his 111 new friends.
*

This was not quite the life of fear and darkness associated with
‘underworlds’. Deciphering coded messages was not just an incon-

venience, it could be a pleasurable art in its own right.

Even when

Strangers
the truth was out, there could be real satisfaction in the exercise of
discretion and the sharing of secrets.

who signed her letters to Natalie Clifford Barney with
significant phrases - ‘I kiss you as skilfully as I know how’ - found in
Colette,

the coteries of lesbian Paris a writer’s

dream of instant, profound

communication:
I enjoyed that wonderful promptness in silent language, in the exchange

of threats and promises, as if, once dull-witted males were out of the
way, every message from one woman to another became as clear as a
flash

of lightning, reduced as it was to a small number of infallible

signs.

Henry James never aired the purposes of his writerly involutions
in such a decisive fashion, but he too revelled in the necessary disguise.

He wrote to J. A. Symonds from Paris on 22 February 1884, referring
to his article on Italy:
I

sent it you because it was a constnictive way of expressing the good

will I felt for you in consequence of what you have written about the

land of Italy - and of intimating to you, somewhat dumbly, that I am

an attentive and sympathetic reader.

I

nourish for the said Italy an

unspeakably tender passion, and your pages always seemed to say to

me that you were one of a small number of people who love it as much
as I do - in addition to your knowing it immeasurably better. I wanted

to recognize this (to your knowledge); for it seemed to

me that the

victims of a common passion should sometimes exchange a look.

Either James was trying to make a simple thought last as long as
possible

(‘I

sent this to you because we both love Italy and I enjoy

your Italian writings’), or he was being profoundly friendly. Almost
everything in his letter to Symonds is a self-revelation: the love of
Italy,

the small number of people, the exchanged look, the ‘victims

of a common passion’, and that key word, ‘unspeakably’, attached to
‘tender’. James’s book on Italy, Italian Hours, was also written for two

audiences, one of which could always deny the other’s existence: ‘The

arching body of the gondolier

[.

.

.]

suggests an image on a

Greek

frieze.’ ‘Most people, I think, either like their gondolier or hate him;

and if they like him, like him very much.’

Even when intentions were quite open, old habits of obfuscation

[148]

Miraculous Love
could give a sense of mystery to the proceedings. In July 1920,

Thomas Mann wrote to Carl Maria von Weber, who had complained
that Death in Venice gave a depressing view of homosexuality. Mann

wanted to remove any impression that
a

mode of feeling which I respect because it is almost necessarily

infused with mind (far more necessarily so than the ‘normal’

mode)

should be something that I would have wanted to deny or, insofar
as

it

accessible to

is

me (and I may say it is so with scarcely any

reservation), would have wished to disavow.
It takes

at least a

minute to see

this Russian-doll

sentence as an

admission of homosexuality, and at least another minute to see that
it

might not be an admission after all.

These phrases often have a peculiar beauty that comes from the
petticoat layers of allusion around the central silence, the labyrinthine
syntax, the pattern of allusions, the cloud that means nothing to some

and that to others is a heavenly hieroglyphic.
Balletic beating about the bush was both a precaution and a ritual.
It can be seen at its best in the Dictionary of National Biography,

many

of whose contributors were homosexual. Some entries are so coy as
to appear insulting, but this was not necessarily the intention. The
idea,

sometimes, was to convey the precious information as it were

under the counter:
Beckford, William: noted for ‘his oriental whims and his mysterious
seclusion’,

which ‘may have been partly owing to grave imputations

upon his moral character’.
Browning, Oscar (the disgraced Eton housemaster):

‘assisted

young

Italians, as he had done young Englishmen, towards the openings they

desired’.

Carpenter, Edward: found his true ‘pagan’ mission in Italy where he

developed ‘a new enthusiasm for Greek sculpture’. His later works on
a certain ‘emotional state’ ‘had more vogue on the Continent than in

England’.

Solomon, Simeon: displayed ‘signs of sentimental weakness’.

Symonds, J. A.: ‘No trait in his character was more marked than his
readiness to fraternize with peasants and artisans.’

[149]

Strangers
Wilde, Oscar, and Lord Alfred Douglas ‘were extraordinarily complementary to one another’.

Some of these velvety circumlocutions are the sound of a door
closing softly against an ignorant world. Like parlare - the circus

slang that was adopted and modified by English gays in the mid-

20th century - secret vocabularies were more a celebration than a
practical device.
thieves’

slang.

Homosexual argot rarely played the same role as

Words borrowed from prostitution - ‘Adary-Ann’,

‘pouf’, ‘fairie’, ‘tante’, ‘tapette’, etc.

- were used in milieux from

which heterosexuals were excluded in any case.
Slang - or rather, a set of code words and euphemisms - was used
just as often by sneering heterosexuals: ‘Is he so}\ ‘Is he one of them?’

or ‘that way’,

‘Is

he musical?’,

‘Is

he a nonconformist?’ The usual

complaint about homosexuals was not that they were hard to spot
but that they were too flagrant. Recondite terms were designed to
banish the subject from open conversation to the linguistic basement.

The most obscure terms relating to homosexuality belonged to a
heterosexual vocabulary:

‘It

smells of garlic here’, in Paris,

meant

‘There are lesbians about’ (from the supposed similarity of a garlic

A ‘chestnut gatherer’ or ‘pin-picker’, in French,
was a sodomite (because they bend over). A French slang dictionary
clove to the clitoris).

of 1874 listed over forty insulting terms for a male homosexual. Gay

men and women tended to use more neutral or more loving terms:
‘friend’, ‘brother’, ‘sister’, ‘father’, ‘mother’,

‘ganymede’, ‘Jonathan’,

‘Lesbian’ (originally an erudite reference to the home of Sappho).

Even today, some of the most interesting and curiously Victorian
circumlocutions can be found in obituaries and literary companions
written by heterosexuals or closet gays.

These phrases should be

collected and studied before they become completely incomprehensible: ‘intensely private’,

‘complex personality’, ‘enigmatic’, etc.
*

For most gay people, non-verbal argot was far more important
than a set of code words. Certain expressions and gestures were

almost universally understood: slightly prolonged eye contact, a flick
of the tongue, a particular way of smoking a cigarette or offering a

Miraculous Love
light, a style

of dress. In the 1900s, red neckties and handkerchiefs

were a clear signal in the United

States, Brazil, Russia, Italy

and

probably throughout Europe. ‘To wear a red necktie on the street’,
said

Ellis’s

American correspondent,

‘is

to

invite

remarks from

newsboys and others.’

Many signs, like the long velvet ties and red boots of St Petersburg
homosexuals, came from the world of prostitution. Eventually, they

were so widely known that they were used by heterosexuals to mock
queers. In mid- 19th-century London, ‘poufs’ were said to ‘place their
fingers in a peculiar manner underneath the tails of their coats and

wag them about’. In 18th-century Holland, homosexual men signalled
to one another by tapping the back of one hand with the other or by

placing their hands on their hips.

Sometimes, tokens were used, like the beautifully primped poodles
of Parisian lesbians or the green carnations of British aesthetes. The
significant bouquet could also include tulips,
exotic, delicate, artificial

lilies,

orchids and any

bloom that was hard to propagate. These

tokens often had long and complicated histories. The poodles were
a

reference to the supposed use to which frustrated ‘tribades’ put

their lap-dogs.

The carnation was a traditional symbol of the anus,

and the colours red and green had a long association with homosexuality.

Pinkness seems to have acquired consistently homosexual

connotations only in the 1900s, but green had been a gay colour
for centuries. Effeminate men in Ancient Rome were called galhinati

because of their fondness for the colour green.

However useful they might be, secret signs are not peculiar to
periods of repression.

Webs of allusion are still spun - in conver-

sations, letters, articles and photographs - when disguise is no longer

necessary. This persistence of old habits is sometimes seen as a form

of ghettoization - allowing gay life to be determined by its underworld
past.
is

But it can also be seen as a celebration of cultural wealth. This

partly a matter of taste and partly of generation. Like tradesmen

ousted by machines, some people missed the chance to use their
special skills.

When the law was changed in 1967, Paul Bailey drank

champagne with his partner to celebrate the fact that he was no
longer a criminal.

Strangers
Yet there were those - the painter Francis Bacon was one of them -

who did not welcome the cautious move towards liberalism. ‘I don’t
want to be tolerated’, an ageing landscape gardener remarked to me.
‘Tolerance is so boring.’ He had enjoyed the ‘thrill of the chase’ for
nearly half a century, and regarded the Labour government’s modest
bill as a ‘terrible

omen’.

In 1977, in his Homosexuality and Literature, 1890-1930, Jeffrey
Meyers managed to present increasing tolerance as a cultural disaster.
‘Subtlety, ambiguity and restraint’ went out of the window along with
injustice:

When the laws of obscenity were changed [...], the theme surfaced
defiantly and sexual acts were grossly described. The emancipation of

the homosexual has led, paradoxically, to the decline of his art.

Most gay men and women - whether or not they were writers and
however much they enjoyed the game - preferred to be able, when
they wanted, to express themselves directly. In the 1920s, T. E. Lawrence, who had hardly dared evoke his rape by Turkish soldiers in

The Seven Pillars of Wisdom (‘the citadel of my integrity was irrecoverably

lost’),

was delighted by E. M.

Eorster’s ‘unpublishable’ tales,

‘The Life to Come’ (1922) and ‘Dr Woolacott’ (1927). It was not the
skilful reticence that excited him but the surprising openness:

There is a strange cleansing beauty about the whole piece of writing
[‘Dr Woolacott’]. [...]! must confess that it has made me change my
point of view. I had not before believed that such a thing could be so

presented - and so credited.

To Lawrence, Eorster’s simplicity was the herald of a happier age.
As Philip Hensher pointed out in 2002, cunning innuendoes are no
longer quite so crucial, at least in some milieux. Opportunities for
wit must be set against the benefits of clarity:
I’ve probably been insulted on the score of sexuality fewer than half a

dozen times in my life and have never troubled to respond with anything more than ‘Oh, fuck off.’ Not exactly Oscar Wilde.

(1832).

Sodom

of

Destruction

The

Martin,

John

1.

THE LIVES
OF

BOULTON AND PARL
EXTRAORDINARY REVELATIONS.

THE TOILET AT THE STATION.

PRICE ONE REISTNY.
Office

:

5,

Houghton Street, Strand.
;

2.

70

‘The Toilet at the Station’, from Men in Petticoats. The Lives of Boulton and Park.
Extraordinary Revelations (1870).

X33MC3E»3Et.OV:«S3»

3.

DES3^3E*jflL:K,€3l-XSra«

‘Closing Scene at the Old Bailey’, The llhistrated Police News,

4 May 1895.

4. Ainbroise Tardieu

6.

Carl Friedrich Otto Westphal

5.

Johann Ludwig Casper

7. Albert Moll

8.

Richard von Krafft-Ebing

9.

‘Man-woman criminals’, by
Cesare Lombroso (1893): ‘a couple
I

came upon in a prison’, showing

the characteristic ‘disproportion
10.
in beauty and age’.

‘The Author Ready to Set Out
11. Journey’, from Autobiography
on Life’s

of an Androgyne by Earl Lind
(1900; published 1918).

George Gatlin, ‘O’n-daig,
the Crow; a beau or dandy in
full array, called by the Ojibbeways

sha-wiz-zee-shah-go-tay-a,
a harmless man’ (1836).

12.

Lord Arthur Clinton, MP,
Frederick Park (‘Fanny’) and
13.
Ernest Boulton (‘Stella, Star of

the Strand’), c. 1868.

14.

‘The Ladies of Llangollen’:

Sarah Ponsonby and Lady Eleanor
Butler.

Anne Lister of Shibden Hall,
Halifax (Yorkshire).

15. Edward Carpenter and
George Merrill at Millthorpe,
17.

near Sheffield (Yorkshire).
16. ‘Walt Whitman

& his

rebel soldier friend Pete Doyle’,

by Moses P. Rice (1865).*
Walt Whitfnan:

'What do I look like here?^
Torn Harned:
'Fo?idness, and Doyle sho2dd be a girl. ’

Radclyffe Hall and

Lady Una Troubridge.

1.

\'oni.lclp;irk

2.

Wcicrmiipl.inisoon

.1

.1.

4.

iO.

D Movt’rpicin

4. diverse

phuilsen l;inus hel

\aari 'an

1

'i'.

\\;iar

/ieh eon Vwenischool' en do al-

sioomboien riehiing /.aandam, Purmerend elc. hevon-

dei)

i.

Figeianlicrsvirachi 142

Nassaiikarle 114

bierhuis Wessclinu, Uireehtseslraai 127

12. bierhuis Spits.

Kerkstraai 212

12. bierkelder C'aiacombc Marni.xstraat 2PS

14. resiauratie N.Z.

5.

Nieuvse Brugsieet; 4 (kolV\ luiis on lojiemeni)

(i.

Prins

k

SinueU.^S

I

lendrikka(.le 5'^

Spuisiraai 2S7

!5. calc hock
16.
1

7.

Kapclsiecg 10
Molstccg'N.Z. Voorburgwal

bierhuis George Heniians. Smakslceg (bij Nieuwendijk)
.Motitliaansteeg (sen’amelplaats .sodom ieten)

18. Gay Amsterdam in the late 19th century.

19. The Rat Mort, a lesbian cafe (after 10 p.m.) on the Place Pigalle in Paris.

20. Unter den Linden, Berlin

21.

Heinrich Hossli,
‘the milliner of Glams’

22. Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

23. Rosa Bonheur, in the

Jahrbiich fiir sexuelle
Zwischenstiifen, 1900:

‘famous French animal
painter, died in

May 1899,

mentally and physically
distinct type of a sexual

intermediate stage’.

Rosa Bonheur (nach dor
beriihinlo

lol/.len

frauziisische Tioriiialca'iii,

1890, soelisoli

und

kra-jierlioli

i’lintou'rapliiei,

verstorbon im Mai

aiisg-osj-n-odioiicr

einer sexuelien ZAvischenstufc.

Typu.s

24. Conrad Veidt as a

persecuted Uranian and

Magnus Hirschfeld as himself,
in Ajiders als die Anderen
(dir.

Richard Oswald, 1919).

25. ‘Berlin Census in a
Thoroughly Modern Home’,

by Erich Wilke (1905).
‘‘How in any children?'"

'Two daughters, one hoy, three

homosexual intermediates,

and one Uranian.

’

26. Havelock Ellis, from

The Binh Co7itrol Review

(New York, 1919).
27. Richard Burton in Arab dress.

28. Max Beerbohm, caricature of Frank Harris:
‘Had Shakespeare asked me, I should have had to submit.’

.

29.

‘Merry Robin stops a
Stranger in Scarlet’: Howard Pyle,

The Meny Advejitmrs of Rohm Hood
Great Renown (1883).
of
30.

From the English
translation of Adolphe Belot’s

Miss Giraud, My Wife
(Chicago, 1891).
'Your strength will wear out

agamst my will and you will exhaust
yourself

3 1

m useless stJ’Uggles.

’

Sherlock Holmes (left)

disguised as ‘a Nonconformist

clergyman’ and Irene Adler as
‘a slim youth in an ulster’,

by Sidney Paget. From Arthur

Conan Doyle’s ‘A Scandal
in Bohemia’, The Strand

Magazine, July 1891.

(1898).

Platoji

de

UEcole

Delville,

Jean

32.

Miraculous Love

Any celebration of specifically gay forms of communication runs
the risk of making love itself look like an accessory.

The point of

secrecy was not to declare the independence of a homosexual state

but to find a means of expressing love.

The circumstances were

different, the disguises more subtle and the passion often intensified

by difficulty or despair, but there is nothing fundamentally eccentric
about gay love
aristocrat,

letters,

chaplain

a

whether they were written by an English

who performed homosexual marriages,

the

widow of a Lieutenant-Colonel or a self-educated man from the slums
of Sheffield:

William Beckford to William Courtenay, Rome, 1 July 1782:
I read your letter with a beating heart,
it

a thousand times. It is needless for

my dearest Willy, and kissed

me to repeat that I am miserable

without you. You know I can scarcely be said to live in your absence.
[.

.

What have we done, Wm., to be treated with such severity! I

.]

often dream after a solitary ramble on the dreary plains near Rome,
that I am sitting with you in a meadow at Ford on a summer’s evening,

my arm thrown round your neck.
You will hardly be able to read
this letter: it is blotted with my tears. My William, my own dear
Friend, write to me for God’s sake.
[.

.

.]

Rev. John Church to his friend Ned, 8 March 1809:
[.

.

.]

My heart is full, my mind

is

sunk,

I shall

be better when I

have vented out my grief Stand fast my dearest Ned to me I shall to

you whether you do to me or no, and may we be pardoned, justified,
and brought more to the knowledge of Christ. O help me to sing -

When thou my righteous Judge shall come
To fetch thy ransom’d people home, [etc.]
[.

.

.]

I

must close, I long to see your dear face again. I long for

Sunday morning till then God bless you.

Maria Barlow to Anne Lister, August 1825:
[.

.

.]

You may command silence but to bid me cease to love you is

& surely it will harm no one. Divided as we are doomed to be, you
may be happy in making others so & those who are blessed with your
friendship & affection can never fail to be so. I may love you to the latest

vain

[153]

Strangers
breath of my existence. That privilege cannot be taken from me,

& that

every blessing may attend you will be the often offered prayer of C.M.B.

George Merrill to Edward Carpenter, 8 November 1896:
Dear Ted [...]! shall be glad to see thy dear face again as I have such
longings to kiss those sweet lips of thine. I will wait till I hear from you,
first.

So I must close dear heart as I am feeling a little low and lonesome.

Fm always with thee every night in spirit, fondest love from your dear
Boy G XXX.

Edmund Gosse’s image of premature burial is unduly grim. Once
over the obstacle of self-deception, it was a relatively short distance
to the new world, some of whose colonies are described in the next

chapter. Anne Lister enjoyed a varied sex life and probably had more

than most of her contemporaries. Symonds and Housman
managed to remain respectable while enjoying long affairs with their
gondoliers. Even the cadaverous Gosse was seen at Browning’s funeral
in Westminster Abbey poring over Baron von Gloeden’s popular
fun

photographs of naked Sicilian boys.

Coming out was not always just a matter of emotional fulfilment:
it

could also be part of a general liberation, a second coming-of-

age.

Long before anyone talked of a ‘post-sexual’ age, the lack of a

homosexual heritage could be seen as a chance to disentangle love

from convention and to experiment with new ways of being. Eor
Margaret Euller, homosexual love ‘was a key which unlocked for me

many a treasure which I still possess; it was the carbuncle which cast
light into many of the darkest caverns of human nature’. Eor Andre
Gide, it was the ‘key’ to his life’s work, the ‘sphinx’ that led him to
tackle all the other ‘sphinxes of conformity, which

my mind suspected

of being the brothers and cousins of the first’. After meeting Una

Troubridge in 1915, Radclyffe Hall discovered the happy irony that
there could be greater freedom in a lesbian relationship than in a

sanctioned alliance.

Eor pioneers like Whitman, Ulrichs and Carpenter, their time in
the desert was a preparation for a better world. Whitman looked to
‘adhesive love’ for ‘the counterbalance and offset of our materialistic

and vulgar American democracy, and for the spiritualization thereof’.

The determination to turn the tables on society and to throw its

Miraculous Love
meagre tolerance in its face became increasingly obvious towards the
end of the century. In this light, the lonely struggles of individuals
look like contributions to a common cause. In Edward Carpenter’s
view, people

who had undergone the arduous education of their

desires were already,

future society’.

whether they knew it or not, ‘the teachers of

6
Society of Strangers

Then, expressing my wish to have her, she answered, ‘But

we have had no priest but love. Do you not know the
quotation?’ I did not yet I said yes. Kissed her repeatedly,
rather warmly.
I

[.

.

.]

Perhaps

I

shall

have her yet before

go.

Anne Lister’s diary, 13 November 1824

Once the Uranian nature of an individual has been certified,

the individual should be officially registered as an

Urning under a special name and should dress accordingly.
In the interests of morality, it would be advisable for the

Urning, in nocturnal roaming of streets and public places
in the

town of residence, to refrain from visiting taverns

unaccompanied and especially to behave in a decent and

modest fashion befitting his womanly nature.
Heinrich Marx, Umingsliebe (1875)

W

HEN Walt Whitman looked forward to a Uranian States
of America, the existing forms of homosexual community

resembled the rest of society as much as Dodge City and Tombstone resembled Boston and Philadelphia.

None

of the various

homosexual groups and milieux of the 19th century seems to present
a model for the future. They tend to confirm the popular impression

that homosexuality was inseparable from prostitution and crime.

Society of Strangers

The main hope

for

would-be founders of

a

Uranian society

appeared to lie in the sheer extent of the territory.

Anyone who approaches the subject from standard historical and
literary sources in

which homosexuality is practically non-existent

might find the figures almost unbelievable. At the end of the century,
homosexual male prostitutes in Berlin accounted for about 20 per
cent of all prostitutes: a homosexual Berliner had approximately five
times as many prostitutes to choose from as a heterosexual Berliner.

Lesbian prostitutes in Berlin were said by different writers to represent between about 20 per cent and 25 per cent of the total. In 1836,
a quarter of all female prostitutes in Paris were found to be lesbian.

Half a century later, the proportion was thought to be even higher.

Some of these women were lesbians who earned a living by having
sex with men. In brothels, as in prisons, female solidarity often took

the form of lesbian ‘marriages’. But many were catering to what was

obviously a lively market. ‘Tribade-prostitutes’ were common on the
streets of St Petersburg, where they were known as koshki (she-cats).

In 1890s Paris, lesbian prostitutes solicited quite openly in the Bois

de Boulogne and the Champs-Elysees. Some shops - especially haberdasheries, perfumeries, boulangeries

and

patisseries

- operated

as

unregistered brothels. There was some concern in the 1890s (though

mostly in unsubstantiated newspaper reports) that rival groups of
upper-class lesbians were actively recruiting innocent girls from shops

and factories.

Homosexual

prostitution,

both

male

and

female,

was

often

mentioned as a common fact of city life, not only in the big cities
but also in places that were not usually thought of as ant-hills of
vice:

Bordeaux, Toulouse, Turin, Zurich, Breslau, Sofia, Dublin, etc.

A wealthy man like Marcel Proust did not have to rely on chance
encounters.

He funded his own ^maison de garqons^ at 11, rue de

I’Arcade in Paris. Tchaikovsky could travel all over Europe and always

be sure of finding someone to have sex with. Roger Casement found
rent boys in Lisbon, Las Palmas and Buenos Aires. Practically every
port,

from San Francisco to San Sebastian, was a haven for homo-

sexuals.

Brothels were vulnerable to ‘clean-up’ campaigns, especially in

England. There were more molly houses in

London in the early

Strangers
19th century than there were male brothels in the early 20th. But
alternatives were always available. In Europe and America, bathhouses

offered sex and companionship and were usually

much safer than

brothels. According to Dr Tarnovsky, ‘blackmailing by bath-servants
is

unheard of, as they do the business in partnership, and share the

proceeds’.

The Bains de Penthievre in Paris, which flourished in

the 1890s, remained in business until the late 1960s. Procedures were
sufficiently similar from one country to the next to be understood by

any visitor. In pre-Revolution St Petersburg, for example, customers

were shown an album of miniature photographs so that they could
choose their attendant and his style of dress. The price list gave an
additional measure of desirability.

Just as men in the novels of Balzac and Zola visit brothels to enjoy

the sort of easy and intelligent female company that they claim not
to find at home, bathhouse customers could relax in a world where

secret signs were no longer necessary. In the bathhouse, the normal
situation was reversed:
a

it

would have taken more ingenuity to avoid

homosexual encounter. Mikhail Kuzmin described a visit to a St

Petersburg bathhouse in 1905:
In the evening I thought I would go to the bathhouse just for style,
for pleasure, for purity.

[.

.

.]

The man who met me at the door, on

hearing that I required an attendant, a sheet, and soap, slowly turned

and asked, ‘Perhaps you want a good-looking attendant?’ - ‘No, no.’
- ‘Well alright then.’ I do not know what came over me, for I was not
even aroused. - ‘No, just send an attendant.’ - ‘Then I’ll send you a

good-looking attendant’, he said, with a persistent look. [.

.

.]

[The young man] began to wash me unambiguously.

There were strenuous attempts to eradicate or regulate prostiwas impossible to prevent the spread of homosexual
districts. According to Rictor Norton, it was after the raid on Mother

tution, but

it

Clap’s molly house in 1726 that the crime-infested area including

Holborn and Saffron Hill became notorious as ‘a molly district’.
Certain parts of Manhattan, especially Broadway and Central Park,
were known to be frequented by ‘sodomites’ as early as the 1840s.
Before 1910, almost every American city had a community of ‘sexual
inverts’ with its own cafes, dance-halls, clubs and churches, and

[158]

Society of Strangers
‘certain streets where, at night, every fifth man is an invert’. By 1922,

Earl Lind could talk of the boldness and ‘political power’ of sexual

underworlds even in ‘America’s smaller cities west of the meridian
of Kansas City’. The flourishing communities described in Edmund

White’s States of Desire: Travels in Gay America (1980) had long histories.

Districts often grew up around particular spots: in Paris, the ‘tree

of love’ on the Avenue Gabriel, the wild boar statue in the Tuileries

Gardens, the boulevard in front of Tortoni’s restaurant, the foyer of
the

Comedie Eran^aise; in London, the statue of Achilles in Hyde

Park was a favourite meeting place (‘the things that go on in front of
that work of art are quite appalling’, says Mabel Chiltern in Wilde’s

An Ideal Husband). The appearance of gay communities is a constant
feature of urbanization. The first small groups in Sweden (Stockholm
1883,

Gothenburg in 1917) coincided with increased mobility

(bicycle

and train). Railway stations, public urinals and parks, and

in

more or less anywhere that afforded cover and an escape route, were
likely to become cruising grounds and ‘trysting places’.

The terms used by early observers - ‘plague’, ‘infestation’ and so
on - suggest a natural, haphazard development, but these districts
were not always unregulated. Visitor’s guides to London and shrewd
signs in pub windows warning the public to ‘Beware of Sods!’ suggest
some rudimentary attempt to organize the market. In the rural
Champs-Elysees of the 1830s, cruising areas were sectioned off by
ropes and park chairs, and sentries were posted, as Victor Hugo
discovered one evening. A polite voice came from the darkness:
‘M. Victor Hugo is requested to pass this time on the other side of
the avenue.’

The same effect was hugely magnified in Australia, which must
have had the largest gay districts anywhere in the world in the 19th
century. In some colonies, heterosexuality was the exception. Sydney

had bars, hotels and drag shows for homosexual men several years
before there was firm evidence of such things in the United States.

The theory that new Australians were corrupted on convict ships
and delivered to the continent in a state of sudden homosexuality
hardly does justice to what was evidently a buoyant gay society. In
1839, the Sydney Gazette revealed - to the horror of some and for the

Strangers
convenience of others - that sodomites were ‘obtaining companions’
at the Victoria Theatre, ‘both during performances and at the inter-

missions’, and then ‘drinking and supping with them at the hostelry

across the way’.
*

There is much less evidence of lesbian organization. Early signs
of social activity are suspiciously lurid and usually relate to particular individuals.

The famous but probably non-existent ‘Club des

Anandrynes’ in Paris (1770s) was a running joke that was used to discredit lesbians like the actress Mile Raucourt. There may have been

confederations of actresses - there were hundreds of smutty poems

on the subject - but actresses had several reasons apart from sexual
preference to band together. Most later evidence refers to institutions:
brothels, prisons, factories, schools, hospitals and department stores.

Almost none of the information comes directly from women, who
tend in any case to be far less categorical than the men. The groups
described by Radclyffe Hall in 1928 are either circumstantial (the
women’s ambulance brigade in the First World War) or remarkably
genteel and discreet (Natalie Clifford Barney’s Paris salon).
Alost lesbians seem to have favoured ‘marriages’ rather than
groups, though this may simply reflect the more restricted social life
of women. Berlin prostitutes often shared a home: the ‘father’ earned
money by selling sex to men; the ‘mother’ stayed at home to cook

and clean. In fm-de-siecle Paris, lesbian couples were known as ‘petites
because they declared their bond by wearing

soeurs' (little sisters)

identical clothes. It seems, however, that the effect of urbanization

on the development of lesbian communities was delayed rather than
profoundly different. The evidence for other cities is patchy, but the
lesbian quarter in Paris was so well developed by the end of the 19th

century that it is hard to believe that it was unique in Europe.

Montmartre - especially the lively zone on the lower slopes - was
already popular with lesbians in the 1880s and had some embryonic
features of a lesbian community. Lesbian couples ‘took over’ certain

apartment blocks and restaurants. Cafes like the Souris and the Rat
Mort were filled at night with noisy crowds of women wearing gaudy
hats and oddly assorted clothes.

‘One would have thought’, said the

[i6o]

Society of Strangers
novelist Catulle Mendes, ‘that they had dressed in a hurry at a second-

hand clothes shop while the police were battering down the door.’
The fact that they stood rather than sat, wore no gloves and used the
argot of artists and pimps was a sign of defiant independence. There
was a wide range of ages and classes. The only men were the waiters
(usually homosexual), a

few sniggering

tourists

and some special

friends of the house, the most famous being Toulouse-Lautrec.

Emile Zola and his wife made a study of the phenomenon for his
novel Nana (1880). His research notes describe a lesbian restaurant
at 17, rue des Martyrs, south of the Place Pigalle:

Louise Taillandier. Summer at Asnieres, a large and beautiful property.
In Paris, three salons; smart day is Friday; up to 150 women and ten

men. The women in pairs. All kiss Louise on the mouth. Mistresses
of solemn bourgeois come to have fun. [.

.

.]

Wine undrinkable.

[.

.

.]

Low-grade actresses. Fortunes made by romping* in town. An old tart,
as

soon as she finds a pretty novice, brings her along and all the fat

ladies pay court to her. Fat ladies predominate.

The ‘large and beautiful property’ at Asnieres, on the Seine northwest of Paris, was described to Edmond de Goncourt by a painter
friend, who went there to paint the old ladies, as ‘a peculiar lesbian

brothel’. Eurther downstream, at a popular bathing spot painted by

Renoir and Monet (‘La Eournaise’), there was a well-known hotelrestaurant run by a former chorus girl. At this lesbian oasis, women

could smoke, wear trousers, lean their elbows on the table and look
for partners. Small waterside chalets

were rented for the summer.

After Maupassant described it in La Femme de Paul (1881), its fame

must have spread far beyond the Seine.

Separating exploitation from free exchange can be just as hard
for us as it was for 19th-century policemen and novelists. The fam-

ously available and beautifully uniformed royal guardsmen in London
for instance

had a long tradition of prostituting themselves before

*

Zola’s verb ^gougnotteF is derived from the derogatory slang term '‘gougnotte\
‘Romp’ (noun and verb) was sometimes applied to lesbians.

[i6i]

Strangers
settling

down and marrying or emigrating - rather like the Oulad

Nail women of Algeria who, according to Gide, traditionally amassed
a dowry by prostitution before returning to their village. In the early

20th century, soldiers in America and Europe could often be hired
for sexual entertainment.

These arrangements

are

probably

best

described

as

mutual

exploitation. There was an understanding that the customer (usually

middle-class and well-off) would show appreciation if the relationship

developed into an affair. An ungenerous ‘twank’ or ‘bag’, as London

guardsmen called their clients, could always be punished or blackmailed into being reasonable. In 1849-50, the Victorian diarist and

man-with-nothing-to-do, Edward Leeves, gave his guardsmen lovers
little presents,

extortion.

took them to the seaside and submitted to some gentle

The letters from his friend D. Paxton - known to his

comrades as ‘Screw’ - were ‘saucy’ enough to be worth a few pounds.

‘He & Tom do look stunning in their White Leathers!’ ‘What a set
of fellows these Blues are!’

A similar situation prevailed in Venice, where Edward Leeves
spent most of his time. Gondoliers, too, had a long tradition of prostitution.

The aim of most gondoliers was to support their family by

supplementing their wages, especially in the winter. A rigid code of

honour and strict rules of conduct allowed them to keep their selfrespect (passive intercourse was shameful; active intercourse was a
source of income). Boys in most Italian cities also served foreign
tourists, as did Tyrolean peasants,

who offered special out-of-season

rates.

‘Subculture’

is

an inappropriately portentous

term for these

arrangements. Sex was - and still is in some parts of the world - a
holiday trade comparable to giving guided tours and selling ice cream.

Some of the young men known to lovers of Venice like Symonds,
Leeves and Rolfe were taking advantage of an adventurous libido and
a sense

of moral freedom to acquire some little luxuries or to avoid

what they considered to be more tedious or demanding work. Some
of them might even have been gay. Most however were trapped by
poverty and abused by pimps. The word ‘tradition’, applied to gondoliers and guardsmen, does not preclude coercion and victimization.
Exotic scenery helped to maintain the idea of a sexual paradise in

Society of Strangers

mind of the paying customer, but desperate paupers could be
found all over Europe and America. A seventeen-year-old boy called
Ernest Thickbroom, who worked at the Cleveland Street brothel in
London, was apparently quite unhampered by his morals, but then
we know nothing of the life that had shaped his daily practice.
When asked ‘If I would go to bed with a man. I said “no”. He said
the

“you’ll get four shillings for a time”

and persuaded me.’ Verlaine,

who discovered London with Rimbaud in 1872, was quick to sniff
out the opportunities:

On leaving the urinal you fall into the hands of young boys who brush
you from head to foot for two sous. I don’t know what else they must
do to people who know to pay a little extra, but they do look formidably
suspect with their little tight-fitting suits and generally charming faces.

In New York, according to Earl Lind, two-thirds of ‘unmarried toughs

of the slums’ between the ages seventeen and twenty-four would

accommodate an invert if ‘their sexual needs were not fully met by
normal intercourse’. However poetic the middle-class customer cared
to be - and however sex-starved the ‘tough’ - this was primarily a
commercial transaction:
‘O you are such a wonderful young fellow! Wonderful alone in your
being brave enough to mount the sky-scraper skeletons! And still more

wonderful in possessing the muscle necessary for wielding a sledge-

hammer all day! May I feel your biceps?’ [etc.]
‘You said it! I’ve got the build of a pugilist. But it’s meself as needs
ter go ter the dentist ter git

me teeth filled and have n’t the price.’
(Earl Lind, The Female-Impersonators)

The difference between prostitution and mutual exchange is sometimes more obvious. It has been suggested that some boys became

Post Office messengers in order to enhance their gay life, but most

young prostitutes were simply victims of exploitation. Jack Saul’s
‘happy hooker’ narrative. The Sins of the Cities of the Plain (1881), is a

work of pornography, not a disinterested personal account. Thousands of infant vagrants were recruited by pimps or served a gruesome
apprenticeship. The real-life equivalents of Eagin’s gang of urchins on

Saffron Hill would not have stopped at picking gentlemen’s pockets.

[163]

Strangers
Very little reliable information presents the prostitute’s point of
view.

The novels of Charles Dickens and Henry Mayhew’s London

Labour and the London Poor avoid the subject altogether. Middle-class
customers who left accounts were either not interested or unaware
of how the profession worked. According to 19th-century accounts
that viewed prostitution as the natural vocation of degenerates, the
ideal career for a male prostitute, at least in Paris, was to stay young
as long as possible, then to set up as a kept man after giving his pimp

away to the police. The boy prostitute, known as a ‘petit jesus’, would
then become an adult

‘jesus’

and could either set about extorting

money from his earlier customers or sell his address list to another
‘jesus’ in preparation for a comfortable retirement. This was known
as ‘going into politics’.

Most detectives and forensic doctors knew of prostitutes who had
grown fat on the fruits of sodomy. One man had a house on the
Champs-Elysees,

a fabulous collection

of paintings and a chateau

in the Loire Valley. Another became chief of police in an American
city.

But these wealthy male courtesans were exceptions. There is

a rare impression of the normal state of affairs in a letter written by

Tchaikovsky in Paris in 1879.

He described a pang of post-coital

remorse in the garret of a ‘petit jesus’ from Lyon:

A bed, a pitiful little trunk, a dirty little table with a candle-end, a few
shabby trousers and a jacket, a huge crystal glass, won in a lottery those make the room’s only decorations.
*•

The close historical ties of homosexual groups with prostitution are misleading. Many heterosexual men with money resorted
to prostitutes, but usually with simpler aims.

For homosexual men,

there were also social, practical and emotional reasons to descend
into the underworld.

The only certain way to find a partner was to head for the redlight district. Heterosexual men could dispense with risky expeditions:
at any social gathering, everyone could be presumed heterosexual and

amount of flirting was acceptable. Homosexual men could
either rely on a dubious ‘sixth sense’ or go to places - clubs, brothels

a certain

[164]

Society of Strangers
or private homes - where the selection of partners had already been

made.
Sex was not always the prime motive. Some establishments became
regnlar meeting places, either because the proprietors themselves

were homosexual or because they knew how to exploit

a special

clientele. Profit was always more powerful than prejudice.

In

New York, several bars followed the lead of Billy McGlory’s

‘Armory Hall’ - a vast dance hall where, from the late 1870s, supposedly beautiful boys with squeaky voices and rouged cheeks indulged
in ‘disgusting badinage’. At the

‘Golden Rule Pleasure Club’ (1892)

on West 3rd Street, each partition concealed a painted ‘pansy’.
The set-up was sufficiently obvious for the crusading Rev. Charles
Parkhurst to turn on his heels and flee from the house ‘at top speed’.

Some proprietors made a deliberate attempt to achieve infamy by
exploiting the

most amusing or eye-catching features of gay life.

New York ‘fairies’ and Philadelphia ‘brownies’ could attract both a
homosexual clientele and the more daring brand of tourist. They also,
increasingly, attracted doctors, sociologists, journalists, politicians and

moral campaigners.

There were also some straight bars where homosexual men were
tolerated and could form their own clubs. The ‘Cercle Hermaphroditos’

held its meetings in the 1 890s at Paresis Hall in Manhattan - a

bar with a small beer-garden and

Avenue south of 14th

Street. In

some furnished rooms on 4th

an ambience remarkable for the

lack of spitting and tobacco smoke, about twenty men with names
like ‘Prince

Pansy’ and ‘Manon Lescaut’ chattered in pidgin French

about their predicaments and passions. The group included a vaudeville actor,

a

man who clothes-shopped for a famous actress, and

the ubiquitous Earl Lind. At Paresis Hall, something like a normal

must have been a cheerful release,
despite the bleakness of the topics: bigoted employers, homophobic

conversation could be held.

It

hooligans, mysterious disappearances.

Some venues

eventually

offered

special

services.

A

bar

in

Amsterdam in the 1890s that was adorned (unusually) with flowers
and pictures of the royal family, ran a job exchange for young gay

men and dispensed remedies for venereal disease. Some brothels
offered medical assistance, and many cities seem to have contained at

[165]

Strangers
least

one sympathetic doctor whose address was passed around. In

Paris,

and probably elsewhere, ‘pederast’ cafes employed female

prostitutes to act as decoys in case the premises were raided.

The most popular public venues were balls, ranging from semiprivate dances to the regular masked balls attended by hundreds of

men - and sometimes women - in drag. The biggest European balls
were those of Vienna, Berlin and Paris: at carnival time, the usual
ban on transvestism was suspended. By the 1900s, ‘invert balls’ were
being held about twice a week in Berlin.

These were not the ‘orgies’ of popular myth. The ‘Viennese balls’
in Berlin were held with the permission of the police, who used them

on criminals. August Strindberg described one of
them in The Cloister (1891):

to keep an eye

Everyone behaved ceremoniously, almost as if they were in a madhouse. Men danced with men, mournfully, with deadly seriousness, as
if they

were doing something they had been ordered to do, without

pleasure, without a smile.

[.

.

.]

seemed to him that the most horrible thing of all was that
everything was done so seriously, and that it was all so respectable!
It

Many of the humbler balls must have been similarly dour. The
Temperance Hall in Hulme (Manchester) was rented in 1880 by a
private club which held drag balls in different parts of the country.
The dancers were given a password (‘Sister’) and danced to the
strains of a blind accordionist in front of blacked-out windows. The

detective

who raided the premises, however, identified the dance

as the can-can,

which can hardly be performed without some joie

de vivre.

By far the commonest type of organization was the club or the
town seems to have had small groups of
homosexual men who either met at someone’s home or travelled
to the nearest city. Even this was a risky undertaking. A group of
Erenchmen in the 1850s went on regular sprees to Lyon, but
always on different trains, ‘or else we’d be the talk of the town the
coterie. Practically every

next day’. Other shared interests could serve as a front. The Eagle
Street College in Bolton (from the 1870s) was a reading group of

Whitmaniacs. The ‘Hafiz Tavern’ in St Petersburg (1900s), which

[i66]

Society of Strangers
functioned as a private homosexual cabaret, could always claim to be
a club for fans of medieval Persian poetry. The ‘Lohengrin’ in Berlin

was ostensibly a Wagner admiration society. Some clubs hid behind
euphemisms: the Reunion philanthropique in Brussels, the Club degli
Ignorant! in Rome, or the Klub der Verniinftigen in Vienna.*

The rituals developed by some of these clubs helped to reinforce
a sense of social identity. The parodies of childbirth and nursing
performed in London molly houses seem to be a mostly 18th-century
phenomenon. But marriages continued to be a common expression
of love and sociality. A surprising number of priests and vicars were

prepared to perform marriages for homosexual men or lesbians, and
there were also

many private arrangements. Anne Lister and her

lover Marianne agreed to ‘solemnize’ their mutual vows ‘by taking

the sacrament together’. They routinely used the words ‘marriage’,
‘mistress’, ‘wife’ and ‘divorce’ without inverted commas.

These marriages were not always subterranean affairs. There is
from late- 19th-century America, Britain, France and

evidence

Germany of hotels rented for weddings, male brides in gorgeous
gowns, exotic honeymoons (sometimes ruined by blackmailers) and
bridal bouquets kept under glass in front parlours. These events were

the feast days of small communities, dates in an otherwise blank
calendar.

The fact that they took place at all shows a remarkable

degree of organization.

The sheer variety of these groups and coteries makes it hard to
identify anything like a coherent ‘gay community’. Some groups were

exclusively working class; many were open to homosexual and bisexual
men and women, others were tightly closed. Some of the most influential groups, like the Cambridge ‘Apostles’ or the coterie at Exeter

College, Oxford, that published The Chameleon (p. 219), were groups

of friends rather than spontaneous expressions of gay culture.

The importance
*

(rational)

''Vemiinftig'

of these

and

groups

''unvernunftig’

is

easily

(irrational)

exaggerated.

were

insiders’

The

terms for

‘homosexual’ and ‘heterosexual’ respectively, as in Platen’s poem, ‘Was Verniinft’ge

hoch verehren

.’
.

.

[167]

Strangers
‘homosexual underworld’ described by Rolfe’s biographer Symons
consisted of a few ‘simple little devils’ who were prepared to have sex
with foreigners. The gay ‘subculture’ in Copenhagen in 1815 seems
to have consisted of a milliner from Paris and ten of his friends.

The most ambitious plans to found homosexual societies - Ulrichs’
secret ‘Urningsband’ or George Ives’ esoteric ‘Order of Chaeronea’*

- were unrealized or confined to small groups of friends. Perhaps the
closest thing to a self-perpetuating gay community was the island of

Capri. The discovery of the other-worldly Blue Grotto in 1826, its
association with the pederastic Emperor Tiberius and the availability

of local boys - but not the tolerance of the local authorities - made

Capri one of the most popular homosexual sites in Europe, at least
for those, like the arms manufacturer Krupp or the Erench aristocrat

poet, Adelsward Eersen, who could afford to run a private pleasure
palace.

Other utopias were even more

exclusive: Erederick the Great’s

Sans-Souci, where a bronze Ganymede stood in front of the library

window and where, said Erederick, ‘ambition and hostility will be the
only sins deemed “unnatural”
Ludwig IPs kitsch medieval castle,
Neuschwanstein; Elisar von Kupffer’s museum- temple devoted to
’;

boy love, the Sanctuarium Artis Elisarion near Locarno. These local
paradises were magnified versions of private rooms decorated with
significant photographs and souvenirs. They were blueprints for a
future society only in the minds of their owners.
The only real homosexual ‘subcultures’ in which established
customs survived from one generation to the next were institutional
- prisons, brothels, navies, or the American hobo subculture. These
mini-societies had their

own initiation ceremonies, well-developed

argots, including a language of tattoos (notably hearts and pansies),

and recognized types of relationship. But they were also obviously
defined by something other than sexuality.
Diversity

is

far

more apparent than uniformity. The idea that

gay culture is characterized in certain periods by certain kinds of

*

Ives,

who talked of ‘the Cause’, dated his letters from the Battle of Chaeronea

(338 Bc), where Philip of Macedonia slaughtered the Theban band of warrior lovers.

Thus, AD 1900 was the year 2238.

[i68]

Society of Strangers
relationship has proved to be vulnerable to fresh evidence. There are

no lasting patterns of sexual activity based on age difference or sexual
role. Even doctors noticed that the ‘active’ and ‘passive’ partners in
a relationship were often interchangeable and that ‘passivity’ had
no essential connection with ‘effeminacy’. Much of the evidence of
prevalent relationships relates to cross-dressing, but

it

is

unclear

whether the professional ‘fairies’ of New York and the ‘petits jesus’ of
Paris were catering to a market, creating a need, or simply parodying
existing types by trying to find a commercial common denominator.

The one feature that stands out is the relative unimportance of
race, religion and class. Some drag balls in America were attended by

blacks and whites. Adolfo Caminha’s revolutionary novel Bom-Crioulo

(Rio de Janeiro, 1895), in which a black sailor loves a young white

cabin boy, was naturalistic, not fantastic.

Throughout Europe and

it

was common for middle-class men to take a working-

class lover.

But this seems to have been largely a matter of circum-

America,

stance. Class differences - like differences of religion and race - were

overridden rather than abolished by desire. ‘Equality’ could become
desperately tedious. Mikhail Kuzmin longed for a friend who could

him both intellectually and physically: ‘a comrade in tastes,
reveries and delights’. The Cambridge ‘Apostles’ discussed ‘the higher
satisfy

sodomy’ but rarely had sex with one another.

Many gays and lesbians still feel marginalized by the notion of a
‘gay and lesbian community’, the coherence of which exists primarily
in the

minds of market researchers.

It

may be after all that the

distinguishing features of homosexual groups will turn out to be more
practical than fundamental. At the present rate of change, monogamy
will soon be a primarily homosexual phenomenon.

may be unprofitable in any case to look to the gay past for firm
traditions. The most remarkable characteristic of these early forms
It

of homosocial organization is not their coherence but their ability to
survive in the diffuse manner of resistance groups or nomads. Some
coteries had an astonishingly wide range.

When clubs or homes were

raided, extensive networks of friends often came to light. Many people

had large collections of photographs, either personal or pornographic.
Visiting cards with photo-portraits were exchanged like cigarette cards.

Clubs corresponded with one another and operated

[169]

as consulates

Strangers
and tourist information bureaux. Anyone travelling to another city
could be given introductions and geographical information of the sort
that was supplied in a less precise form by voyeuristic city guides.

There was even a kind of gay Grand Tour, the stages of which
remained more or less mysterious until the ‘pink’ guidebooks of the
late 20th century. (See the ‘Map of Uranian Europe’, p. 278.) Byron,

for instance,

was conscious of following in the wake of Beckford,

‘the Martyr of Prejudice’, when he sailed for the Continent in 1811,
just as later travellers followed the Wilde trail to Berneval and Paris

or the Rimbaud trail to London and Ethiopia. These new maps of
martyrs’ travels were superimposed

on older routes with historical
and mythological staging-posts: Chaeronea, where the Theban band
perished; Leucadia, where Sappho jumped to her death; Mount Ida,
where Zeus ravished Ganymede.

The public reaction to revelations of homosexual networks was
always slightly hysterical. There was talk of a European ‘freemasonry’,

an invisible web of vengeful, scheming perverts: ‘Men of this breed
are to be found everywhere’, wrote the Berlin journalist Maximilian

Harden, ‘in the editorial offices of great new-spapers, at tradesmen’s
and teachers’ desks, even on the Bench.’ Eriedrich Engels was fascinated by the idea of a homosexual state within the State.

When

Marx sent him the Uranian pamphlet he had received from Karl
Heinrich Ulrichs in 1869, Engels had a J. Edgar Hooveresque vision
of ‘pederasty’ as a rival of international socialism:
Pederasts are beginning to count themselves and are discovering that

they are a power in the State. All they lacked was organization, but it
looks from this [pamphlet] as though it already exists in secret. And

they have such important men

[.

.

.]

in the old

and even in the new

parties that victory will certainly be theirs. ^Guerre aux cons, paix aux
trous-de-culs'

[‘War on cunts, peace to arseholes’j will be the cry. It’s a

good thing we’re too old to have to worry about paying bodily tribute
to the victors. But think of the young generation!

were not entirely detached from reality.
Active urban ‘pederasts’ belonged to a very mobile and cosmopolitan

These ludicrous

fears

society. Not all were bourgeois tourists taking a holiday from neigh-

bours and policemen. Emotional as well as financial poverty was a

[170]

Society of Strangers
good reason

to

emigrate. Mobility was not usually a matter of

choice. In 1865, the Parisian police picked up signs of a homosexual
diaspora. It was traced back to a raid

on a flourishing club in the

Crenelle area of Paris. Confiscated letters revealed a sparse but well-

maintained communications network.

One letter, dated 7 February

1865, was characteristically international: it had been sent by a Swiss

businessman in London to

a

Swede who was in the service of a

Russian aristocrat in Rome but who was temporarily in Paris staying

with his lover and former master, an Italian count.
I

heard that you left for Africa. [.

.

.]

The Boulevards or the Champs-

Elysees would have been better, though they are not without danger.

Be careful, my gazelle. The ladies have had so many mishaps in the
last six months.

for her

.

.

.

[.

.

political

.]

.

The Margrave of Saint-Leon has suffered greatly
opinions. Like many others, she was forced to
.

.

leave Paris for several months.

[.

.

.]

If you have any news of all those darling people who are scattered

to the four corners of Europe, be sure to tell me. Poor girls! What a

struggle they have with people’s prejudices!
It is easy to imagine the amazement of the detectives

letters.

who read these

The 19th-century gay world is full of strange coincidences

make it look like a continental village: Earl Lind knew one
of Whitman’s ‘adopted sons’; several people knew Karl Heinrich
Ulrichs; the prostitute-author Jack Saul knew everyone. Familiar
names turn up in unexpected places: Simeon Solomon, arrested at
that

the pissoir outside the Paris Bourse; Proust’s friend Raymond Laurent,

found dead outside a Venice hotel by Wilde’s son, Vyvyan Holland.

Some men - described by Albert Moll as ‘travelling international
celebrities’

- became famous for their beauty and were recognized

throughout Europe.

Many people had so many parmers that these coincidences are
perhaps not surprising after all. Even in the 21st century, circles of
acquaintance overlap at only a few removes. In a smaller society, and
in a sub-population with powerful common interests, networks were

bound to be extensive. Some of Krafft-Ebing’s patients claimed to
know Jarge numbers of Uranians even in small towns (from eight in
a town of 2,300, to more than eighty in a town of 60,000).

Strangers
Clubs and cruising were the central nervous system of a dynamic

and heterogeneous society. Its busy streets and anonymous connections can be seen in the few diaries and notebooks that have survived.

Many of them seem at first to have been written by sex maniacs with
a passion for accounting. Kenneth Searight’s epic verse autobiography
- ‘The Furnace: an autobiography in which is set forth the secret

diversions of a paiderast’ - recorded sexual exploits throughout the
British Empire and beyond. He had sex with at least 129 boys from

1897 to 1917. Roger Casement was equally wide ranging but more
prolific.

Earl Lind had known 800 men in twelve years (an average

of one man every five and a half days) and was just as busy when he
travelled to Europe.

These inventories of brief liaisons might suggest a degree of overcompensation, but they were also personal reminders that society was
not as heterosexual as it thought. The records kept by John Maynard
Keynes from 1906 to 1915 were like alternative roll-calls and registers,
the sexual-economic figures from which the activity of a whole society
could be deduced. This is part of one of his lists:
Stable Boy of Park Lane
Auburn haired of Marble Arch
Lift boy of Vauxhall

Jew Boy
The Swede of the National Gallery
The Young American of Victoria Sta
The Young American near the British Museum
.

The chemist’s boy of Paris
The clergyman
David Erskine, M.P.

The Blackmailer of Bordeaux
Whitman’s notes of encounters in Manhattan are just as evocative
but more obviously humane. His compressed jottings were the dry
ingredients that could later be used to produce delicious memories
and fill the future society of comrades with bodies and faces:
- wandering at the corner of Lexington
av. & 32d St. - took him home to 150 37th street, - 4th story back
Saturday night Mike

Ellis

room - bitter cold night

[172]

Society of Strangers
James Sloan (night of Sept 18 ’62) 23 rd year of age - plain homely,
American
^

October 9, 1863, Jerry Taylor, (NJ.) of 2d dist reg’t slept with me last
night weather soft, cool enough, warm enough, heavenly
*

The fragile sense of a gay community was based on experiences
that seemed to preclude the possibility of a community. But then why

should ‘comrades’ simply form another society like the old one? This
apparent promiscuity was a life outside the society that had caused

such grief and shame.

The men who flocked to alleyways and pissoirs, who offered themselves to strangers and explored dark quaniers they would otherwise

never have seen, were being sociable, not subversive. Fleetingness

was essential, not just for practical reasons. The poems of Constantine
Cavafy celebrate transience as a liberation. The past could never stick
to single, unrepeated moments of physical pleasure. History could be

rewritten in the folds of a sheet and then smoothed out again. It was
the revenge of chance

on inevitability, sudden intimacy instead of

endless anonymity, the memory of the body replacing the memory

of the educated mind. And when they returned to the everyday world,
all

lovers could be certain in any case, like Cavafy’s student Myrtias,

in ‘Dangerous Thoughts’ (191 1), to find the spirit as ascetic as before.

[173]

7

A Sex of One’s Own
No virgin I deflower, nor, lurking, creep.
With steps adult’rous, on a husband’s sleep.
I

plough no field in other men’s domain;

And where I delve no seed shall spring again.
Anon., Don Leon (1866)

Among the homosexuals there is found the most remarkable
class of men, namely, those whom I call supervirile. These
men stand by virtue of the special variation of their soulmaterial, just as much above Man, as the normal sex man

does above Woman. Such an individual is able to bewitch
men by his soul-aroma [...]. Names like Alexander the
Great,

Socrates,

Plato,

Julius

Caesar,

Michel-Angelo,

Charles XII of Sweden, William of Orange, and so forth.
[.

.

.]

Consequently the German penal code, in stamping

homosexuality

as a crime,

puts the highest blossoms of

humanity on the proscription list.
Gustav Jaeger, Die Entdeckung der Seek (1880)
(tr.

Edward Carpenter)

A Sex of One’s Own

T

he sense oe solidarity fostered by some of these groups
could turn shame into self-respect and fear into defiance. Homosexual coteries and milieux were not just a happy convenience, they
were a sign that things might change.

There was little sign, however, of any organized agitation until the
end of the 19th century. Despite the revolutionary Code Penal of
1791, the very notion of homosexual rights would simply not have

occurred to most people. Even now, while specific rights are widely

acknowledged, gay rights are still contentious. It was not until the

mid-1990s that Amnesty International began to support prisoners

who were persecuted for their sexual preference.
In the early 19th century, most gay people never wondered why

homosexual relations were proscribed. Many never thought themselves innocent: they considered themselves weak, sick or freakish,

and their dream was to be cured or left in peace. Uranians who were
happy with their inclination were just as unlikely to demand reform,
even privately. Just because a part of them belonged to a minority, it
did not follow - any more than it does now - that they would be in

favour of social change. Anne Lister was proudly lesbian and pro-

foundly conservative. She found the idea of women’s rights ridiculous

and constantly reproached herself for talking to social inferiors. Her
solutions were practical and lawful. She taught herself to ignore
sarcastic comments and contrived a kind of marriage with her friend

Marianne by insuring her life in Marianne’s favour. In this way, she
could offer her a husband’s protection. She no more blamed society
for the inconvenience than she thought of prosecuting the weather for

making her house damp.

The history of the gay rights movement is, in fact, remarkably
short, and any attempt to prolong its past life would only distort its

Some of the texts that are used in college courses as
examples of early gay militancy are plainly ironic. The petition of
‘The Children of Sodom to the National Assembly’ (1790), attributed

true origins.

was an attack on the
government that decriminalized sodomy: ‘The Assembly of Buggers,
to the pro -revolutionary Marquis de Villette,

Sodomites and Lesbians’, which decrees complete freedom of action,
‘even in the paths of the Luxembourg Gardens, despite what the legal
owner says, and without hindrance by any other person’, was not a

[175]

Strangers
real organization.*

The ‘Societe des Emiles’ (1860s) did exist and

was popular with several members of the French government and the

War Office, but its famous rule-book is a satire, not a confiscated
document: ‘Indecent relations with individuals of the female sex are
banned’; ‘The concierge

is

to keep

two goats permanently at the

disposal of military gentlemen who may be in a hurry’, etc.

These spoofs are sometimes treated as genuine calls for equality,
which only shows how little good evidence there is of organized
homosexual protest. The lack of precedents also explains the peculiar
prestige of the Marquis de Sade, whose La Philosophie dans le houdoir

(1795) contains a detailed and rational defence of sodomy and lesbi-

anism as natural forms of contraception. Between orgies, one of the

main characters describes a passion for one’s own sex as an innate
disposition;

he condemns the barbaric practice of killing people

because ‘they do not share your tastes’, and notes the prevalence of
the noble vice in all parts of the world, including ‘the entire American
continent’.

Sade represents a strand of Enlightenment thought that helped to

show the way, but he makes a wretchedly sardonic pioneer. His
defence of homicide in the same text is just as vigorous as his defence
of homosexuality. As a recent sourcebook puts

it

with admirable

moderation, ‘No matter how one might want to embrace liberatory
discourse about sexuality today, the philosophy

upon which Sade

based it shows his limits in his analysis of murder.’

The published writers who could, at a pinch, be described as early
champions of gay rights would never have seen themselves in this
light. Montesquieu, Voltaire, Beccaria and Condorcet were simply
asserting the right of human beings not to be tortured and burned
at the stake for a

crime that had no victim. ‘Sodomy violates the

right of no man’, said Condorcet. The same argument can be found

throughout the 18th and 19th centuries and traced back at least to

*

The carnival rhetoric of the Revolution (and of later French revolutions) thrived

on sexual nonconformity. Villette, the ‘retroactive citizen’, was the object of several
satires. Phrases such as ‘for all ages and all sexes’ were commonly used to poke fun
at egalitarianism: e.g. the Almanach lyrique ‘for democratic, aristocratic and impartial

fuckers, or

The Three Sexes’ Calendar’ (1790), which could be found ‘At Sodom,

Cythaera and especially in the pockets of those who condemn it’.

A Sex of One’s Own
Thomas Aquinas, but it rarely amounts to a defence of homosexuality
per se.

Most pleas for justice or tolerance were never published, though
the fact that they were written at

all

shows that the idea existed.

In 1811, Byron jokily proposed to write a pamphlet titled ‘Sodomy
simplified or Paederasty proved to be praiseworthy

authors and

modern

practice’.

In

1818,

after

from ancient

translating

Plato’s

Symposium^ Shelley wanted to make his reader ‘cast off the cloak of
his self-flattering prejudices’.

His ‘Discourse on the Manners of the

Antient [«r] Greeks Relative to the Subject of Love’ (1818) cautiously
hinted that sodomy could be an expression of love and that it was
hardly ‘more horrible than the usual intercourse endured by almost

every youth of England with a diseased and insensible prostitute’.

The complete text of the discourse was not published until 1931, in
a private edition

of 100 copies. Shelley himself was not prepared to

cast off the cloak of prejudice. In a letter written four months after

the Discourse, he expressed disgust at Byron’s choice of companions
in Italy: ‘wretches who seem almost to have lost the gait and physiognomy of man, and who do not scruple to avow practices which are

not only not named but I believe seldom even conceived in England’.

The real silent star of early gay rights is Jeremy Bentham, who
wrote several hundred pages on the subject between 1774 and 1824.

At first, his main point of attack was the law against that ‘odious taste’
and the busybody legislator who

‘thrusts himself in

between’ two

consenting adults. But half a century produced a change of emphasis.
In the same rationalizing spirit that led to the creation of the word
‘homosexuality’, Bentham tried to devise a less tendentious vocabulary.

He talked of ‘regular’ and ‘irregular’ rather than ‘natural’ and

‘unnatural’ forms of intercourse, and called homosexuality ‘the improlific

appetite’ (because it does not produce babies).

Bentham’s voluminous notes are probably the first such writing on
the subject in English, yet they seem to

sum up the general trend

of the next 200 years, as if the collective mind would slowly follow
the

same argument to the same conclusion: humanitarian protest,

informed relativism and, eventually, direct approval. Bentham finally

came close to defending ‘the improlific appetite’ on its own terms:
there were traces of it in the Gospels (see p. 242), it helped to prevent

[177]

Strangers
over-population, and it appeared to be universal. According to Ben-

tham’s anthropological information, only two tribes - one in New

South Wales, the other in eastern Canada - were known to abuse
women, and neither practised homosexuality.
The texts by Shelley and Bentham now look like milestones on the
road to liberation, but they had to be excavated later on and were

unknown at the time. Bentham’s plan to collaborate with Beckford
came to nothing. The sketch of a preface explains why: ‘Never
did work appear
from which at the hand of public opinion a
man found so much to fear, so little to hope.’ The only effective work
[.

[.

in Britain was

.

.

.]

.]

done by a few active reformers like Edmund Burke,

who twice sued newspapers, in 1780 and 1784, for hinting that his
opposition to the pillorying of sodomites proved that he was one
himself. The example was unlikely to push Bentham into print.

There was however one earlier defence of homosexuality in English
which deserves to take pride of place if only because it was published.
In Smollett’s The Adventm^es ofRodaick Random (1748), Earl Strutwell’s

defence of sodomy may be ironic but it presents the principal argu-

ments of the next two centuries with the concision and humour that
are painfully lacking in later disquisitions: the wisdom and excellence
of famous homosexual men, the global prevalence of a supposedly
unnatural taste, its tendency to diminish the number of bastards and
venereal degenerates, and - something that makes Smollett a more
inspiring pioneer than either

Bentham or Shelley - its ‘exquisite

pleasure’.
*

On the Continent, as every English moralist thought he knew,
such matters were more freely discussed. Even before Goethe’s essay

on Winckelmann, German writers - who had at their disposal more
editions and translations of classical texts than their neighbours were debating the nature of Greek ‘pederasty’. Comparisons were
drawn between ancient and modern forms of homosexual love,
notably in Ramdohr’s Venus Urania (1798), which contained some real
contemporary examples (see p. 140).

The culmination of these studies was a two-volume pot-pourri
by a self-educated milliner in Glarus (Switzerland) called Heinrich

[178]

A Sex of One’s Own
Hossli (1784-1864). Eros. Die Mannerliehe der Griechen (1836-8 and

1840) might seem an obscure and chaotic work, but it had a lively
effect on later developments. It was

an inspiration to Ulrichs and a

major source for Albert Moll’s influential study of 1891.
Hossli, whose second son was homosexual, had been horrified by

the torture and execution of a lawyer in Berne in

1817. Franz

Desgouttes had murdered his young secretary, but the court’s unusual
cruelty was clearly motivated by Desgouttes’s homosexual passion for
his victim. Hossli asked the

popular writer Heinrich Zschokke to

write a novella on the subject but was disappointed with the result:

Der Eros., ‘a conversation about love’, was a disquisition rather than a
defence. Hossli decided to write his own Eros. His main ideas were
that human laws were not the same as Nature’s laws, that ‘Greek
love’ had been maligned by Christian propagandists, and that ‘sexual
nature’ is not a matter of choice. But the real force of his book lay
in the anthology of texts which presented homosexuality as something
civilized and beautiful: Aristotle, Socrates, Horace, Saadi, etc. Hossli’s

shopful of texts must have been a revelation to his readers.

From a historical point of view, the book itself is probably less
significant than the fact that a man who made hats for a living and

had no obvious talent for writing spent several years and a lot of

money trying to write and publish it.
Writers tend to exaggerate the importance of the written evidence,
but, even in Continental

Europe, there is very little to exaggerate

until the last third of the 19th century. The strongest hints of future

movements are to be found, not in literary texts, but in a tone of
defiance that becomes increasingly noticeable from the mid- 18th
century. There is something of this tone in the letters of Beckford
and Byron, but it can also be heard in sodomite trials held in cities
like Amsterdam or Paris where small communities offered daily con-

firmation that homosexual love was not essentially depraved.
It was in

France, with its tradition of revolutionary violence, that

the first stirrings of gay resistance were seen. At Riom prison in the

Auvergne, in April 1848, the prisoners rioted, attacking warders and
breaking open cells, when a young homosexual man was separated

from

his

boyfriend.

Cruising-grounds in Paris were tenaciously

defended. In the 1840s, at the central markets, Les Halles, arrests

[179]

Strangers
usually began at 9 p.m.

Sometimes the market porters joined in.

But the ‘pederasts’ would return the following evening with fresh
recruits.

When the wood partitions in the nearby toilets were replaced

with metal sheets, they drilled new holes, and when pederasts were
arrested, they showed a keen sense of their sexual rights.

A cafe waiter,

who had had to flee from mobs and policemen so many times that
the prosecution was able to present five shoes as evidence against

him, ‘complained bitterly about police procedures, which he described
as an attack on his freedom’:

He openly confessed to the purpose of his daily and nighdy perambulations,

there?

but added, cynically: ‘There are brothels of women, aren’t

Why shouldn’t there be brothels of men? As long as this injustice

persists, respectable fellows like

myself will be in danger of getting

themselves arrested.’

When the police decided to clean up the Champs-Elysees, there
was armed resistance and blood was spilled. These pitched battles
never acquired the symbolic importance of the Stonewall

riots

of

1969, but they do show that gay militancy was not a 20th-century
invention.

An active sense of homosexual identity could also be detected in
the use of more pleasant names than ‘pederast’ or ‘sodomite’. Insult-

ing words like

^tapette'*

were defiantly adopted by some Parisian

homosexuals, but other names implied a proud heritage. The com-

monly used term, 'chevaliers de la manchette^ (‘Knights of the Sleeve’)
referred to the last of the Han emperors who, rather than wake his
lover who had fallen asleep on his arm, cut the sleeve of his robe.
The word 'spartiate^ (‘Spartan’), used by Sade and the socialist

visionary Fourier, referred to the Theban band of lovers and implied
strength, loyalty and strict morality rather than the usual catalogue

of vices.

Growing awareness of this bold heritage created a fertile ground
for later movements. The cosmopolitan young man who wrote to

*

A male prostitute. A ^tapette’ was a wooden paddle used to drive corks into

bottles.

[i8o]

A Sex of One’s Own
Dr Casper in 1852 was not only unrepentant, he almost felt sorry for
heterosexuals:
Believe me, we are generally better and more gifted than other people.
[.

.

.]

How can our sins be so great when they were committed by men

like Plato, Julius Caesar,

Frederick the Great, Gustav III of Sweden

and many others? Were Winckelmann and Platen vulgar men? Most
of us have beautiful eyes and the eye, after all, is the mirror of the
soul!

By 1865, Karl Heinrich Ulrichs was able to look forward to a great
change. Soon, Uranians would stop trying to

fit

in with society,

society would have to adapt to them. Men in cafes would be appalled
to see articles in their daily paper with titles like ‘On Love Between

Men’. But, said Ulrichs, ‘you will just have to get used to it, like
crabs to slow cooking. Hopefully, it will not be detrimental to your
health.’

We last saw Ulrichs frightening his family with his circular
letters (pp.

132-3).

He eventually published twelve pamphlets on

Uranian love, between 1864 and 1879. His proposals included a new
civic

and

legal category for

homosexual

men and women and ‘a

Uranist Union’, the aim of which would be ‘to bring Urnings out of
their previous isolation and unite

them into a compact mass bound

together in solidarity’.

This alone would make Ulrichs the founding father of gay rights,
but he was not content with letters and pamphlets. In 1865, he

proposed that the Congress of German Jurists debate a motion to

demand equal rights for the third sex. The proposal was rejected.
To judge by his later hesitations, he must have been relieved. Until
1868, all his pamphlets were published under a pseudonym, and the

thought of defending such a motion in public was terrifying.
In 1866, one of his readers sent

him a copy of Hossli’s book.

Ulrichs was haunted by the milliner’s words: ‘Two paths lay before

me: to write this book and expose myself to persecution, or not to
write and be riddled with guilt when I enter my grave.’ The following
year, Ulrichs returned to the Congress, which was held in Munich.

[i8i]

Strangers

He had just left Hanover for the last time after being arrested for
opposing the Prussian annexation. This seemed to give him the necessary combination of despair and determination.

On the second day

of the Congress, Ulrichs celebrated his forty-second birthday. On the
third day, after changing his mind up to the last minute, he became

the first person in history to come out in public. The speech, admittedly,

contained no direct statement about his own sexuality, but the

implication was clear to everyone in the hall.

My heart was pounding in my breast as I mounted the podium on
August 29th, 1867 in the Grand Hall of the Odeon Theatre, in front
of an audience of more than 500 German jurists, which included some

members of the German Parliament and a Bavarian prince. I mounted
the podium with God!

He reached the part of his speech in which he claimed that there
were thousands of Urnings in Germany and that this ‘class of people’
included ‘many of the greatest and noblest intellects of our and other
nations’. At this, there were calls to adjourn. But loud protests came

from the other side of the hall: ‘No, no, go on, go on!’ The President
asked Ulrichs to continue in Latin (in which he was fluent), but he
left the podium without finishing his speech.

Ulrichs was already an experienced campaigner, and accounts of
his historic speech that present him as a doomed martyr are an insult

to his polemical skill. The reaction, during and after the speech, was

not unanimous. Instead of running away, Ulrichs attended the closing

banquet in the Glass Palace. Some people avoided him, but others
‘freely and loyally engaged in conversation with me’.

A few stunned

and silent faces in the audience had shown that his words had not been
wasted. For a supposedly futile gesture, the speech was remarkably
successful.
*

The Grand Hall at Munich in 1867 stands at the junction of what
seemed to be the two main roads to freedom: the public assertion of
rights and their theoretical defence. The first road was to remain
almost deserted until the mid-20th century; the second led through

[182]

A Sex of One’s Own
endless conurbations and branched off so often that no one could be
sure that it was even heading in the right direction.

Most of the theories that were used to promote reform now sound
apologetic and self-defeating. The idea that homosexuality was natural

and innate might have been an argument for decriminalization but it
tended to be presented, even as recently as the 1960s, in a peculiarly

demeaning fashion. Homosexuality was compared, by its defenders,
to colour-blindness and congenital deformities like hare lips and club
feet. It

was said to be common among primitive tribes and practi-

cally every species of animal,

which only confirmed the impression

of moralists and policemen.

The abiding image of Gide’s Corydon

(1st edition, 1911; 12 copies) is that of two copulating male dogs on
a

boulevard being separated by a gendarme. Even Ulrichs’ theory of

‘half-men’ in whom a soul of one sex is ‘trapped’ or ‘shut up’ i^inclusa'^)
in a body of the other, suggested some horrible mistake. Liberation, in
this case, would surely have consisted of a return to normality.
It is

revealing that one of the

late- 19th-century

campaigners

commonest reference points for
was

Schopenhauer’s

depressing

explanation of ‘pederasty’ in the second volume of Die Welt als Wille

und Vorstellung (1844). Like most people who gave the matter any
thought, Schopenhauer realized that so-called ‘unnatural’ desires were
a natural occurrence. Unlike most people, he associated the phenom-

enon with men who were either too young or too old - hence his
explanation: pederasty was Nature’s

way of ‘obviating unsuccessful

procreations that might gradually deprave the entire species’.

Schopenhauer was fifty-six years old at the time and seems to have
had some personal experience of the phenomenon. His manner of
describing it, however, was scarcely flattering: the sex instinct, he

wrote, is led astray in pederasts, in the same way that the bluebottle
{musca vomitoria) is tricked by the smell of putrefaction given off by
the arum dracunculus into laying its eggs in the arum’s flowers rather

than on rotting meat.
After Ulrichs and his notion of a third sex, this search for expla-

nations and justifications opened up the subject to endless bickering

about causes and mental states. Worse still,

it

allowed the rest of

society to dictate the terms of the debate. Ulrichs himself gave up

[183]

Strangers
the fight in 1880, when he emigrated to Italy. He eventually settled
in L’Aquila and devoted himself to a journal written in Latin.*

The more pragmatic debate, which focused on the law against
sodomy, ran into similar difficulties, though it produced an unprecedented spate of writing, about homosexuality and

a

very active

rights organization. Kertbeny’s open letter to the Prussian Minister

of Justice in 1869, which introduced the neutral term ^Homosexualitat\

and Heinrich Marx’s Umingsliebe (1875) argued for the rights of an
essentially

moral and law-abiding section of the population.

The

problem here was that, while the sodomy law provided campaigners
with a clear target, it also led them to reinforce the idea that homosexuality was largely a matter of sexual acts. The first open protest

published in English - the anonymous poem, Don Leon (1866), falsely
attributed to Byron - was practically a compendium of sodomy trials

and appeared to be concerned above all with a certain kind of intercourse.

The main arguments were that sodomites do not transmit

syphilis and that their ‘sport obscene’, ‘left unheeded, would remain

unknown’. This was hardly an expression of pride.
Even the more progressive ideas - a separate State for Urnings,
or the introduction of a new civil status - were acknowledgements
that Uranians needed special treatment. Exactly the same ideas were

espoused by people who wanted to control the ‘problem’ or solve it

once and for all.

Looking back from the early 21st century, the most convincing
arguments now seem to be the simplest - those that appealed to a
basic sense of fairness or that held up a mirror to the accusers:
Why, I wish to know, is it perfectly moral for me to copulate with a
personage whose sexual organs are different from my own, and perfectly immoral for

me to copulate with a personage whose sexual organs

are not different? (Lytton Strachey (d. 1932), essay collected in The
Really Interesting Question, 1972)

We ought to think and speak of homosexual love, not as ‘inverted’ or
‘abnormal’

[.

.

.]

or as an unhappy

fault,

a ‘masculine

body with a

feminine soul’, but as being in itself a natural, pure and sound passion,
*

Ulrichs died in 1895. His home is now a pilgrimage site on the gay Grand Tour.

A square in Bremen was renamed Ulrichsplatz in August 2002.

[184]

A Sex of One’s Own
as worthy of the reverence of all fine natures as the honourable devotion

of husband and wife, or the ardour of bride and groom. (James Millis
Peirce, first dean of Harvard Graduate School, to J. A. Symonds, 1891;

published posthumously in Sexual Inversion, 1897.)

Before the first gay rights organization was created at the turn of
the century, the most effective contribution of theorizing writers was
largely accidental.

The flood of mostly German publications that

followed Ulrichs’ sixteen-year campaign - well over 1 ,000 books and
articles on homosexuality from 1890 to 1914 - showed the astonishing

size

of the homosexual population. This, more than anything else,

gave ‘Urnings’ a sense of their democratic rights - and the confidence

demand them - and awakened politicians to the existence of a

to

powerful force.

The first estimates were extremely low. Ulrichs’ first guess was
Some
campaigners, like Kertbeny and Magnus Hirschfeld, may have
0.002 per cent and he never went higher than 0.5 per cent.

reduced their estimates so as not to alarm their readers: their figures

hover around 2 per cent. But by the end of the century, figures of

4 per cent and above were commonly cited for Germany, Holland,
all of Europe and ‘middle-class England’. This is close to the
average found by many modern surveys, including Kinsey’s report of

1948 (4 per cent of white adult males exclusively homosexual
throughout life).’^

Even the meeker estimates made it possible to talk about millions
of homosexual men and - after initial doubts - women. Variations
were identified: an upward trend when heading East; a preponderance
in certain professions
etc.

and classes: hairdressers, waiters, aristocrats,

Otto de Joux claimed in 1893 that every third male servant was

homosexual. According to an Italian study of 1900, 60 per cent of
all

inverts

were musicians, indicating almost a million homosexual

musicians in Italy alone.

*

Edward Prime- Stevenson quoted what he

The unusual figure of 0.02 per cent, triumphantly touted by Dr Maranon in

1930, was based on Madrid police records showing 687 inverts in all of Spain: ‘The

smaller number of inverts in Spain by comparison with Central European countries
is

notorious. This superiority of the Latin races is recognized by all writers on the

subject.’

[185]

'Strangers
said was a ‘psychiatric proverb’, though it is hard to imagine anyone

actually uttering it: ‘So many Jews, so many similisexualists.’

These figures confirmed what many people already guessed from
their own experience. Percentages are still eagerly discussed and used

to gauge the likelihood o£ change. In 1997, Hugh David found the
figure of 4 per cent of the adult male population depressingly low (it
is

equivalent, in Britain, to the population of Glasgow; in the United

States, to the population of Los Angeles).

But in the days when it

was possible for people to think that they were unique, even 0.1 per
cent would have been a comfort.

This cheerful demographic news was one of the highlights of
the dazzling ‘Pederasty’ section in Richard Burton’s ‘Terminal Essay’
to

The Arabian Nights (1885). Burton cheekily identified a ‘Sotadic

Zone’ lying between latitudes 30° and 43° north in which ‘the Vice’

was popular and endemic. This Zone, as if by chance, coincided with

what was supposed to be the cradle of western civilization. It was
clear in any case from Burton’s planet-wide evidence that, when the
ethnographic information was complete and all the other ‘sotadic’
parts were added, only a few poorly populated enclaves of endemic
‘normality’ would survive. An illustration of the Zone based on
Burton’s

evidence would

have

looked

something

like

the

map

opposite.
*

The first part of this chapter really belongs to the prehistory of
gay rights. The modern story begins at the end of the 19th century
with the creation by the Berlin doctor Magnus Hirschfeld of the
‘Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare

Komitee’

(Scientific

and Humani-

tarian Committee). It was the kind of name that could safely appear

on a brass plaque or a letter-head without arousing any interest.
In 1895, Hirschfeld, a general practitioner, was shaken by a suicide
one of his patients: a young homosexual lieutenant who
killed himself on the eve of his wedding. His dying wish was that

letter from

Dr Hirschfeld, who was also homosexual, would help to improve the
lot of people like himself.

A few days later, all of Europe seemed to be gloating over the

Night

a
and

Nights

Thousand

the

of
Book

The

in

Essay’

‘Terminal

the

on

based

Zone’,

‘Sotadic

Burton’s

Richard

'Strangers
downfall of Oscar Wilde. In Paris, the French- American poet Stuart
Merrill drew up a petition asking for the sentence to be reduced.

Almost everyone refused to sign, including Emile Zola. A British
petition, prepared

by More Adey, was even less successful. Magnus

more diverse audience and was
consequently more effective. He and his journalist friend Leo Berg
sent letters of protest to the newspapers and Hirschfeld set to work
on the first of his many books: Sappho und Sokrates, or ‘How can one
explain the love of men and women for people of the same sex?’ It
was published pseudonymously in 1896 by a young Leipzig publisher
Hirschfeld had wider aims and a

called Max Spohr. Spohr had already published two pro-homosexual

works and was to prove remarkably resistant to prosecution.

The following year, while sitting in a train on his way to visit
Spohr in Leipzig, Hirschfeld jotted down nine good reasons to repeal
paragraph 175 of the German penal code. The result was a petition

and the formation of the above-mentioned Committee on the day
after Hirschfeld’s twenty-ninth birthday: 15

Ten years later,

the

May 1897.

Committee had 500 members and corres-

pondents throughout Europe. Erom 1899 to 1923, its journal, the
Jahrhuch fur sexuelle Zwischenstufen (‘Yearbook of Sexual Intermediacy’), published hundreds of historical, literary and scientific studies,

reviews, letters, pictures, news items and bibliographies. It effectively

founded a new discipline and inspired or publicized the first serious

Ludwig Erey’s Aus dem Seelenleben
des Grafen Platens (1899), C. H. Eahlberg’s H. C. Andersen: Beweis
seiner Homosexualitat (1901), Hans Rau’s Franz Grillparzer und sein
Liebesleben (1904) and Eduard Bertz’s Der Yankee-Heiland (Walt
Whitman): Ein Beitrag zur modemen Religionsgeschichte (1906).*
outings

of modern writers:

Hirschfeld’s Committee conducted polls, organized petitions, tried
to secure visiting rights for jailed homosexuals

and offered lesbians

legal protection from violent husbands. It delivered medical certifi-

cates that allowed its cross-dressing members to obtain transvestism

*

‘The Mental Life of Count Platen’; ‘H. C. Andersen: Proof of his Homosexuality’
(by ‘Albert Hansen’); ‘Franz Grillparzer and his Love Life’; ‘The Yankee Saviour
(Walt Whitman): a Contribution to the Modern History of Religions’.

[i88]

A Sex of One’s Own
permits from the police and worked with the ‘Pederasty Division’ of
the Berlin police to combat blackmailers. It undertook a programme

of public education with pamphlets

know about the Third

like

‘What the People should

Sex’ (1902). Judges presiding at trials of

homosexuals were bombarded with explanatory documents. Hirschfeld himself appeared at hundreds of trials as

also

an expert witness. He

appeared as a therapist in one of the first gay films, Anders als

die Anderen

(‘Not Like Other People’; dir. Richard Oswald, 1919),

in which an

imprisoned Conrad Veidt watches a long procession of

homosexual kings, poets and philosophers passing under a banner

marked ‘Paragraph 175’.*

The Committee had a difficult life. Some of its more dramatic
plans proved unworkable - like the idea of a mass self-denunciation

by a thousand homosexuals who would inundate the police stations
and demand to be prosecuted.

Its

meetings were often banned,

especially after women (supposedly more corruptible) began to attend,

and sometimes broke down when members suffered an emotional
collapse or,
all

on one occasion, attacked a doctor who accused them

of lacking willpower. Hirschfeld himself was fined 200

DM for

disseminating obscene literature - specifically, a questionnaire sent to

3,000 medical students and 5,000 metal workers. In Munich, in 1919,

he was beaten up by nationalist hooligans.

There were also the usual internal disputes. In 1902, a group led
by Adolf Brand declared independence. The ‘artistic’ and paederastic
‘Gemeinschaft der Eigenen’ (Community of the Special) was inspired

by snobbish pseudo-Greek ideals. Its motto might have been, ‘Boys
for pleasure, wives for convenience’. Their misogyny and occasional

anti-semitism make them sound like a missing link between 1890s
aesthetes and the Hitler youth. But their discomfort with Dr Hirschfeld is understandable. In his statement of secession in 1907,

one of

their leading figures, Benedict Friedlander, rejected the cowardly

*

The first known gay film was Swedish: Mauritz Stiller’s Vingame (‘The Wings’)

(1916), based on Herman Bang’s novel about a sculptor and his pupil, Mikael (1904).

The wings refer to Carl Milles’s sculpture of Ganymede and Zeus in the guise of an
eagle.

[189]

Strangers
notion that homosexuals were sick and effeminate. How could they
expect to be treated as equals if they presented themselves as freaks

and invalids?
Hirschfeld was well aware of the problem. He had tried, without

much success, to neutralize the Committee’s medical aura by canvassing the support, not just of doctors, but also of lawyers, politicians

and clergymen. The scientific approach, especially when promulgated

by the earnest ‘Aunt Magnesia’ (Magnus Hirschfeld), lent itself to
parody. The cartoon that appeared in the Munich

Jugend in

1905 under the title, ‘Berlin Census in a Thoroughly Modern Home’,

was not entirely unjustified:
Census Taker:

‘How many children?’

A Mother: ‘Two daughters, one boy, three homosexual intermediates,
and one Uranian.’

The impression of pseudo-scientific debate and power struggles
among the impotent is unfortunate but inevitable. With Magnus
Hirschfeld’s Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare Komitee, the almost featureless night sky of earlier

gay history gives way to the smaller,

higher-resolution world of organizations, schisms, dates and egos.

Even so, the world’s first gay rights organization - what Thomas
Mann called ‘Dr Hirschfeld’s ghastly “Committee” - not only did a
’

lot of practical good, it was also a sign of progress.

The apparently absurd proliferation of scientific terms - ‘similisexual’ and ‘alterosexual’, ‘homosexual’ and ‘heterosexual’, ‘allosexual’

and ‘normosexual’,
sexual’,
etc.

‘unisexual’,

‘monosexual’, ‘parisexual’, ‘femino-

‘philarrenic’, ‘androphile’, ‘ephebophile’, ‘commasculation’,

- hinted at the future emergence of different sexualities from

the previously undistinguished mass of ‘sexual deviants’. Hirschfeld

himself coined

the

term

‘transvestite’.

The

sheer visibility and

apparent decency of the Committee’s activities were a confirmation

and legitimation of something that was supposed not to exist. Questionnaires began to appear at the end of the century. For

all

their

quirky precision, they suggested, like the later Kinsey Report, that
sexuality in all its forms and ‘intermediate stages’ was a normal part

of everyday life. Hirschfeld’s questionnaire of 1899 eventually grew

[190]

A Sex of One’s Own
into a 137-question invitation to recognize oneself as a homosexual
(1903):

-

Do you have a preference for particular smells?
Do you have a tendency to write anonymous letters?

- What do you usually carry in your pockets (knives, powder-box,
matches, photographs, etc.)?*

The Committee’s humourless but memorable propaganda also
gave a recognizable, public context to what might otherwise have

been very lonely defences of gay love: Gustav Jaeger’s Die Entdeckung
der Seek (2nd edition, 1880), Otto de Joux’s Die Enterhten des Liebesgluckes (1893)

and Die

hellenische

Liebe in der Gegenwart (1897),

and Ludwig Frey’s Der Eros und die Kunst (1896).^ It amplified the
almost silent voices of the last 100 years: Hossli’s Eros^ or Symonds’
privately printed essays,

A Problem in Greek Ethics (1883) and A

Problem in Modem Ethics (1891). It also helped to prepare the way for
studies that went far beyond the pleas for law reform and pity, like

Edward Carpenter’s The Intermediate Sex (1908), Iwan Bloch’s socialanthropological studies (from 1902), and Charles Leland’s The Alternate Sex, or The Female Intellect in Man, and the Masculine in

Woman

(London and New York, 1904), which insisted on the bisexuality of
all

remarkable people.

Above all, the Committee helped homosexual rights to be seen as
a cause that civilized people should support. By 1923, its petition
had been signed by thousands of people, including Albert Einstein,
Sigmund Freud, Hermann Hesse, Rainer Maria Rilke, Thomas and
Heinrich Mann, and Arthur Schnitzler.
It would be easy to list the Committee’s failures. Its main aim was
the abolition of paragraph 175, which was not fully repealed until
1994, and its international presence remained largely academic. The
British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology, founded by Edward

Carpenter and Laurence Housman in 1914, was mostly a vehicle for

*

Samples of Prime-Stevenson’s questionnaire (c. 1908), based on Hirschfeld’s, are

given in Appendix II.
^

‘The Discovery of the Soul’; ‘The Disinherited of Love’s Happiness’; ‘Hellenic
Love in the Present’; ‘Eros and Art’.

[191]

Strangers
talks and publications, though it also functioned as a correspondence

club for gay intellectuals and as an official front for George Ives’s
secret Order of Chaeronea (p. 168). The only American equivalent

was the Society for

Human Rights created by Henry Gerber in

Chicago

was broken up by the police

in

1924.

It

after

a

few

months.

Worst of all, to Hirschfeld’s regret, the movement was never able
to exploit its solidarity with women. This was a recurrent theme in

early gay rights. Ulrichs had campaigned for the rights of women and

unmarried mothers. The Swiss sexologist and entomologist, Auguste-

Henri Forel, who called for a law allowing homosexual men to marry,
also demanded complete equality of the sexes and a recognition that

housework was just as important as paid work (in Die sexuelle Frage^
1905). The suffragette Johanna Elberskirchen published a pamphlet

on ‘The Love of the Third Sex’ under the slogan, ‘No Degeneration.

No Guilt’ (1904). But as the feminist Anna Ruling pointed out in a
speech to the Committee in 1904, although ‘the women’s movement

would not be where it is today’ ‘without the active support of the
Uranian women’, it was unwilling to attract more opprobrium than
it

already had to cope with. In Britain, too, the suffrage movement,

which had roots in social purity campaigns, was inclined to oppose
any form of illicit sexuality.

Anna Ruling also suggested that lesbians had suffered from the
lack of anti-lesbian legislation: men could attack a well-defined law,

women could only struggle with the hydra of prejudice. This alone
does not explain why lesbian activism is almost totally confined to
the later 20th century. Men with university degrees, a private income

and an office were better able to found institutes and committees.
Women contributed to the debate under men’s umbrellas and tended
to be even more respectably technical than the men. Edith Lees (Mrs

Havelock Ellis) saw ‘the invert’ who avoids ‘cheap physical expression’
as the natural ally of the eugenicist. Stella Browne, who was also
active in the British Society for the

Study of Sex Psychology, called

for social change, but on the grounds that ‘female perversion’ was an
artificial result of oppression:

women in a free society would naturally

be heterosexual. Even the book that finally gave a face to lesbian rights

[192]

A Sex of One’s Own
- Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of Loneliness (published and prosecuted in
1928) - now seems remarkably tentative and apologetic.*

Despite

its

disappointments, and considering the almost total

silence that preceded

it,

Hirschfeld’s

Committee was an amazing

accomplishment. In the end, the fatal blow was struck, not by internal

wrangling but by scandals and politics. Sordid attacks on the antiimperialist diplomat Prince Philipp zu Eulenburg - one of the Kaiser’s
closest

advisers

- culminated

in

a

series

of embarrassing

trials

(1907-9). Hirschfeld’s ‘scientific’ testimony looked ridiculous alongside

the sensational revelations of high-ranking military officials

prancing about in tutus and weeping into handkerchiefs. Hirschfeld
further damaged his reputation by changing his diagnosis in a later
trial

to support a journalist,

Maximilian Harden,

who had been

favourable to the Committee.

The trials and attempted cover-ups were perceived as a national
humiliation and introduced the whole western world to the hilarious

new German word, ^Homosexualitdf. Eulenburg’s enemies in the
Bismarck camp took full advantage. The subsequent replacement of
doves with hawks in the Kaiser’s entourage was later cited as a cause
of the Eirst World War.

The next time the German Parliament debated paragraph 175, in
1909, the official proposal was to increase the penalties and to criminalize lesbian acts as well.

Hirschfeld’s Committee made a partial recovery after the war. In

1919, Hirschfeld created his Institute for Sexual Research and spent

much of his remaining sixteen years lecturing in Europe, America
and Asia. He died in Nice in 1935, two years after the Nazis destroyed
his Institute and burned his library.

The sinister imbeciles who thought that they were eradicating the
work of a Jewish homosexual were of course deluded. Hirschfeld and

The first national lesbian organization was ‘The Daughters of Bilitis’ (founded
San Francisco, 1955), though women also played a role in the predominantly male
Mattachine Society (founded Los Angeles, 1951). The only earlier sign of organized
*

lesbian resistance is an isolated incident mentioned by Havelock Ellis: ‘In a Spanish

some years ago [1890s?], when a new governor endeavored to reform the
homosexual manners of the women, the latter made his post so uncomfortable that
he was compelled to resign.’
prison,

[193]

Strangers
his Committee had encouraged and recorded one of the most sudden

and prolific flowerings of writing and debate on any single topic since
the Reformation. After Hirschfeld, it was easier to imagine a society
that might one day find hatred stranger than any kind of love and

even fail to understand what all the fuss had been about. On the other
hand, perhaps they simply made homosexuality look more exotic than
ever. Pessimists

could argue that rational agitation for reform only

created more excuses for repression.

Hirschfeld himself might have tried to measure success by asking
if his patient, the young lieutenant

who killed himself in 1895, would

have been less likely to do so a hundred years later. According to
twelve different studies conducted in Europe and America between

1978 and 2000, young gays and lesbians are at least twice as likely as

young heterosexuals to make a serious attempt at suicide. The experience of being gay might have changed much less than the history of
the gay rights
easily

movement would suggest. Changes in etiquette are

confused with changes in attitude. A hundred years on, the

young lieutenant might still have killed himself, but the mourners at
his funeral might have felt more at liberty to express their sympathy.

[194]

Part Three

nr
'^*

rl

i€^

•

^4t-<

‘•*'*''^

‘'T#'’'

V

itf- li‘

i

•

?.

*•.»

.1,*•

>

'

•.’

Vv

y|.

•

-

.

rtMlit*

’

'

f" -Unf;-^ S

^V' :••
'

tA'aPt

.

'

i^'sa»t-i" &

#:

'•'

.‘<4.‘-'”^

^-v
‘.-

r

.ar

i.'-g-

^V^»'~- °‘-

f^'

Ji^''-V^i-'S ''%-. -C-.2-

r

’

-f*'

*
',

f-«r'

-

‘ <

:

,,

-

'"I

.''

•*'^^’

'^'

tv,

'
,

,:*a*^:: .

^

'JB -'-

:-l-

'’v'--

r,

.

•

iMW

'

Fairy Tales

Walking aimlessly, he came to the door of the house. He
crossed the hall, climbed the stairs and took refuge in his

room: he neither wanted to see nor to be seen. He opened
the bookcase and closed it again at once, saying, ‘So many

books, and not a single line for me!’
Joseph Mery, Monsieur Auguste (1859)

I

take this opportunity to

mention the strange prejudice

of Uranists regarding novelists or poets who, in whatever
fashion, touch

on the subject of love between men. The

modern Uranist is immediately convinced that the writer
has Uranist tendencies. [.

.

.]

Uranists are usually incapable

of taking a cold, objective view of anything that relates to
their nature.

Albert Moll, Die contrare Sexualempfindung (1891)

T

he last part of this book is an attempt to dispel an impression
that the first parts have created: that homosexuality was practi-

cally absent from the rest of society and that everything would have

gone on in much the same manner if men and women had never
fallen in love with people of their own sex.

In the early 20th century, no one could plausibly claim (though

many did, implausibly) that homosexuality had little or no effect
on the supposedly normal order of things. But to say that it was a

Strangers
constant and vital influence was to invite disagreement and provoke
disbelief.

Some writers pointed to heroes of civilization like Socrates

and Michelangelo and pleaded for tolerance on the grounds of discernible profit to the majority. This, however,

the heroes

drew attention to all

who were clearly not homosexual and left the average

non-genius in an uncomfortable position. Others, like Hans Bliiher
in

Die Rolle der Erotik in der mmnlichen

Gesellschaft (1917),

claimed

that homosexuality is not only natural but also the basis of all human
society. This might have been true on a vast, theoretical plane, but it

had little connection with daily life. Both arguments tended to ignore

women altogether.
The argumentative approach turns facts into battlefields and has
the same effect on historical evidence that armies have on populations:
it

creates political factions, diminishes individuals, invites retaliation

instead of correction, and takes up a lot of space. The main aim of

the following three chapters is mercantile rather than militant - to

present the available evidence for a vital gay presence in three areas:
literature, religion,

and something more diffuse that might be called

the art of living in the modern world.

Until the 1880s, very few modern literary works mentioned
homosexuality directly. Even at the turn of the century, when ‘Decadent’ literature made the subject fashionable, only a small number of
living faces lurked among the waxwork villains and perverts.

A novel

by Gautier and several novels by Balzac are sometimes made to
represent the views of a whole period, but they are so unusual that
their main role in a social history of homosexuality should be to show

what was missing elsewhere.
Gautier’s Mademoiselle de Maupin, double amour was published in

1835-6 when Gautier was twenty- four. The first volume (1835) ended
with one of the first descriptions of a gay man coming out to himself

and to a friend. D ’Albert later discovers that his beloved ‘Theodore’
is

a woman, but not until the second volume.
‘I

no longer know who I am, nor what other people are.

[.

.

.]

For a

long time I have been listening to myself and observing attentively.

[198]

Fairy Tales

[.

.

And at last I have discovered the terrible truth

.]

love

.

.

.

No! I shall never be able to tell you

.

.

.

.

.

.

Silvio,

Fm in

Fm in love with a

man!’

The lesbian aspects of the novel were just as remarkable. Madeleine
de Maupin’s transvestism

is

logical rather than pathological:

she

wants to know what men say about women behind their backs and to
find a more interesting pastime than ‘pushing a bit of wool through

the holes of a canvas ten million times’. Her own sexual feelings for

women are adult, satisfying and sane.
Balzac’s novels (1830s and 1840s) are even more extraordinary. La

Comedie Humaine now looks like a whole prehistoric civilization where

none was thought to exist. In Balzac, homosexual love takes several
different forms. It is not explained away as depravity or madness.
Even now, most gay characters carry psychological sandwich boards

advertising their sexuality to the exclusion of all other

traits.

But

Balzac’s characters are never reduced to their sexual peculiarity. Their
love, even when satisfied, does not inevitably lead to punishment and

death. In Vautrin and

Cousin Pons, homosexual love is not only a

possible source of happiness, it is actually a redeeming feature.

Balzac and Gautier were practically unique in published literature
for several decades.
rise

Towards the end of the 19th century, with the

of literary realism and the resulting scramble for new subjects,

references to homosexuality became more frequent, but the increase
is

negligible compared to the increase in the total number of books

published.

In the present state of research, only about fifty works of western
literature in the 19th century can be said to treat the subject of male

homosexuality more or less openly. This figure includes several works
that were

known only later, like Melville’s Billy Budd (published in

1924), or that treated the subject incidentally or imperceptibly. Parts

of Rimbaud’s Une Saison en Enfer were construed as a homosexual

drama only by those who knew about his affair with Verlaine. Before
the medicalization of the subject, nearly every recognizably homo-

sexual male character was a type rather than a person who happened
to be homosexual. George Sand’s weedy Sylvinet in La Petite Fadette

(1849) and Thomas Hardy’s ‘slack- twisted, slim-looking maphro tight

[199]

Strangers
fool’,

Christian Cantle, in The Return of the Native (1878) suffer from

arrested development and are non-heterosexual rather than positively

homosexual. Sand herself was not quite the sexual pioneer of literary
legend. In Histoire de ma vie^ she described her horror at discovering
that certain paragons of ‘ideal friendship’ were in reality examples of
‘insane or sickly deviance’.

‘I

was filled with disgust and saddened

when I fully understood the tale of Achilles and Patroclus, Harmodius
and Aristogiton.’

Most references went unnoticed in any case. Stendhal’s notes for
show him covering his

his unfinished novel Lucien Leuwen (1834-6)

tracks almost as soon as he conceives the character of Lord Link:

Milord Link is a Bishop of Clogher, but don’t say so. Milord Link is in
exile

from England and has four or five apartments in Montvallier,

where he prefers to live because he is too well known and discredited
elsewhere.

But don’t state the reason.

Even Balzac’s descriptions were subtle enough to be fully appreciated only by a few. In 1891, in ‘The Decay of Lying’, Oscar Wilde

was able to describe the death of Vautrin’s lover Lucien de Rubempre
as

‘one of the greatest tragedies of

my life’ without giving too

much away. Le Pere Goriot was a set text in British schools for most
of the 20th century, but the nature of Vautrin’s attraction to his

young protege Eugene de Rastignac was as obscure to most readers
(including this one) as it was to the character himself:

‘Monsieur is siding with Collin’, she replied, scrutinizing the student
with an expression of venomous curiosity. ‘And it’s not hard to understand why’

Hearing this, Eugene sprang forward as if to pounce on the old

maid and strangle her. Her treacherous meaning was written on her
face and in that instant it cast a terrible light in his soul.

Lesbianism was mentioned far more frequently. But most ‘lesbian’
literature, like the fashionable paintings

of sapphists lounging about

in boudoirs, harems and Turkish baths, was created by men for male

consumption. One of the best-known accounts of a physical lesbian
relationship was Diderot’s La Religieuse., written in 1760. But his tale

of an astoundingly innocent novice preyed upon by a lusting Mother

[zoo]

Fairy Tales
Superior is more remarkable as an early realist novel than as a psycho-

The theme itself was an 18th-century commonplace.
Like several other men who wrote about lesbians, Diderot was

logical study.

worried about the possible proclivities of his mistress and was not
well placed to see beyond the cliches.

Serious depictions of lesbian love based on personal experience or
careful thought were extremely rare. George Sand, whose friendship

with the actress Marie Dorval was a

common source of gossip,

resorted to male cliches. In Ldia (1833), lesbianism was associated

with misanthropy, incest and the dangerous sophistication of an
ageing civilization. The daring scene of lesbian love between Telia

and her

Pulcherie, like Coleridge’s ‘Christabel’ (1797) and

sister

Baudelaire’s ‘Femmes damnees’ (1857), came with the moral guarantee of guilt

and wickedness (Pulcherie is ‘the world’s most famous

courtesan’):
‘I

trembled as I kissed your arm. Then you opened your eyes and their

penetrating gaze filled me with an unknown sense of shame. I turned

away as though I had committed a guilty act. And yet, Telia, no impure
thought had entered my mind. How could that be? I knew nothing.

my creator and master, were giving me my first

Nature and God,
lesson in love.’

Homosexuality in most literary works was an affliction rather than
a virtue,

a lack of

something rather than

a positive attribute. In

English literature, it was confined almost entirely to school stories,

where it signified either innocent enthusiasm or puerile depravity.

The passion usually ended with the death of one of the friends or
with the awakening of adult sensibility and the discovery of girls. The
bestselling Er/V, or Little by Little (1858) by the schoolmaster Frederic

William Farrar - known to Swinburne as ‘Dr Thwackum of Marlborough’ - was deemed suspiciously effeminate by The Saturday
Review: ‘to the infinite indignation of all English readers, [the boys]
occasionally kiss each other (principally however when they are in
articulo mortis

[at

the point of death]) exchanging moreover such

endearments as “dear fellow” and the like’. But even Eric drew a line

between beastliness and passion. Eric and Edwin may ‘[squeeze] each
other’s hands,

and [look] into each other’s faces’, but any boy who

[201]

Strangers
oversteps the

mark is condemned as a servant of the Devil and a

spreader of ‘moral turpitude’. E. M. Forster deliberately reversed this
cliche when he made Maurice’s coming-of-age consist of embracing

rather than shedding his homosexuality.

The later depiction of obviously homosexual characters was almost
always defined by a specific concern - the sorry state of relations

between

men and women, the ‘decadence’ of the modern world,

the scandal of prostitution or, later, the rise of a homosexual rights

movement. Most novels on the subject that appeared in Britain and
America were translations and could safely be regarded as studies of
the moral climate in other countries. Current affairs were always more
in evidence than psychology. In the 1880s and 1890s, several novels

tackled the subject of sodomy and bullying in the French
forces.

armed

The notorious case of Alice Mitchell (Memphis, 1892), who

cut her lover’s throat, produced a spate of tales about murderous
lesbians.

Many novels, by men and women, were inspired by fear

Rhoda
Broughton’s Dear Faustina (London and Leipzig, 1897) is a homedestroying kidnapper of decent young girls. She visits slums, comof women’s emancipation. Typically, the

title

plains about the conditions of the workers,

character of

and has friends with

‘wildly cropped grizzled hair and super-manly coats and waistcoats’.

Her cutlery is never clean and she eats at the Aerated Bread Company
instead of at a proper dinner table. Lesbianism, like socialism, atheism

and vegetarianism, is a symptom rather than a state of mind.

These

ideological caricatures were actually a sign of progress.

Increasingly, fictional lesbians wore clothes and spent less time with
their

own bodies. Their Romantic sisters gazed at themselves in

mirrors, stared out to sea, anticipated eternal damnation and, for an

obscure reason, gnawed the bark of young
lesbian

was educated

at a

trees.

The fin-de-sikle

boarding-school or a convent. She was

frighteningly self-possessed, wore dark colours, read novels, smoked
cigars, injected morphine or inhaled ether, suffered from excess hair

except on the head, spent too much time in conditions suitable for
tropical plants,

and was prone to horrible diseases. But at least, by

the end of the century, she had developed other interests and had a
social life.

Fairy Tales

A SIMPLE CHRONOLOGICAL list of pocms and novels in which homosexuality was mentioned would suggest that a specifically homosexual

category of literature emerged in the last two decades of the 19th
century. But this was something quite different from what we now

think of as gay literature.
First, the rise

of the subject should be set against its continual

repression. Balzac was often cited as the author of a melodramatic

work about a lesbian, La Fille aux yeux (Tor (1834-5), but his male
homosexuals were ignored until the 1960s. A longer list could be

drawn up of deliberately 72072-homosexual works: translations of
classical and modern texts in which the boy-lover was changed into
a girl (as in the first French translations of Whitman’s Leaves of Grass)\
poems, novels and plays in which Sappho was depicted as the unhappy
lover of a man. Countless poems were expurgated.

A line in Goethe’s

famous song ‘An den Mond’ went through a typical series of changes
like a stain through several washes: ‘Blessed he

who

[.

.

.]

holds a man

to his breast’. Goethe changed ‘man’ to ‘friend’; Charlotte von Stein

changed the line to ‘who keeps his soul pure’; and finally the whole
stanza was expunged from the anthology, Gothe als Lyriker (1821).

Second, most books that treated the subject openly were also

openly hostile. Tales of sodomy in ‘investigative’ works

like

City

Crimes^ or Life in New York and Boston (1849), by ‘Greenhorn’ (George

Thompson), or Sodom in Union Square, or Revelations of the Doings in
Fourteenth Street, ‘by an ex-Police Captain’ (1879), were obviously

not supposed to be impartial. In the 1890s and 1900s, the commonest
word in titles of novels on homosexuality is ‘vice’. The best-known
studies advertised themselves as warnings. Adolphe Belot’s novel.
Mademoiselle Giraud, ma femme (1870; US translation, 1891), about a
furiously frigid lesbian, carried a stern preface by Emile Zola:

Cease to hide this book; place it on all your tables,

as

our fathers

placed the rods with which they chastised their children. And, if you

have daughters, let your wife read this book before she separates herself

from those dear creatures to send them away to school.
Zola’s jown male homosexual characters - Maxime in La Curh (1871)

and Hyacinthe in Paris (1898) - were analysed as the human waste
products of a sick society.

[203]

Strangers

Most cautionary novels were addressed to husbands and fathers.
Alfred Cohen’s A Marriage Below Zero (New York, 1 889) was a warning
to the other sex. Elsie Bouverie (‘Emma Bovaiy’ with a twist) realizes

too late that her husband Arthur, who wore rouge at their wedding,
is

a lover

of men: ‘As I look back now I wonder how I could have

been so dense. It appears to me now that the veriest blockhead could
have grasped the situation.’

Anyone, let alone a blockhead, might have failed to grasp the point
of the pioneering Monsieur Auguste (1859) by Dumas’s collaborator

Joseph Mery. Addressing himself to prospective fathers-in-law, Mery
claimed to be filling a gap in literature: of all the ‘perverse, odious,
eccentric or deadly individuals’ described by novelists and playwrights,

only one had escaped attention. Mery’s hero was a male homosexual.

But the author had ‘preferred to commit the sin of obscurity rather
than shed too much light’, and as one reviewer pointed out, ‘you have
to concentrate very hard to find out
false tto-voiced painter

Auguste,

what he is’. The fair-haired,

who has the blood of a water-lily

in his veins, strangely refuses to marry Louise, who has a

dowry of

500,000 francs. Readers who knew what Antinous, Girodet, Naples

and a fondness for diluted champagne had in common would have
understood. Everyone else would have read a tedious tale in which
everything seemed to be significant without signifying very much.

Moral condemnation
seriously.

The

in these novels should

subject of homosexuality,

when

not be taken too
it

was broached,

remained extremely popular with readers, and authors were generally
rewarded for their daring.

A book called Les Intrigues de Moliere

(1688), in which Moliere was said to have been the lover of his pupil

and principal actor, was republished by three different 19th-century
editors before 1877. Sales of Dr Tardieu’s forensic handbook on sex

crimes and ‘pederasts’ (1857) would have thrilled a novelist. Mery’s

Monsieur Auguste had a new edition in 1 860 and was republished in
a

cheap paperback series in 1867. Abel Botelho’s 0 Bardo de Lavos

(Oporto, 1891) was the

tale

of a degenerate aristocratic ‘pederast’

and a beginner’s guide to gay Lisbon: it sold out in two weeks and
was translated into Spanish in 1907, making it one of the first

modern works with a clearly homosexual subject to appear in Spain.
In 1908, a Erench ‘documentary and anecdotal’ study of German

[204]

Fairy Tales
homosexuality was reprinted nineteen times in three months. In 1909,
Frederick Rolfe saw illustrated books about homosexual love as

a

lucrative alternative to gondoliering: ‘Such books, privately published

in Paris or Antwerp at £1

would sell like blazes.’

The growing prevalence of the subject in European and American
literature

was not primarily a result of moral campaigns or anxiety

about the decline of standards. Nor, of course, was it a result of
greater tolerance. Foucault’s perception that even censorship was a

way of generating ‘discourse’ about sex applies to novels as well as to
medical works.

By the end of the 19th century, novelists had found new ways to
write safely about homosexuality. Medical theories not only dissemi-

nated

information,

they

also

made

the

subject

intellectually

respectable. Case studies supplied ready-made characters whose every

physical trait - dress, figure, gait and smell

- exactly matched the

inner self. ‘Inversion’ was a naturally dramatic subject: love against
the law, decent people forced to live like criminals, individuals at

odds with their own upbringing.

It

generated that most precious

commodity: new plots. All the old tales of amorous misunderstanding
could be retold with a different punchline. Some plots were so confused that the claim to be elucidating an obscure area of life looked

extremely dubious. In

Weiberheute by ‘Luz Frauman’

(Budapest,

1901), a frustrated lesbian hypnotizes her girlish stepson into thinking

himself a woman. She then induces a phantom pregnancy in him,
fosters her own son on him and convinces him that he has given birth

to a girl. Her death-bed confession is dismissed by the pseudo-mother
as delirium. In

Armand Dubarry’s Les Invertis (1906), a homosexual

Count WOOS his bride’s lover by promising not to deflower the bride.

The bride, meanwhile, is pursued by the Count’s lesbian sister. This
creates some original situations: a husband upset by the infidelity of
his wife’s lover; the adulterous couple fleeing to a life of respectability.

Many novels contained long ‘scientific’ passages to justify the titilcopied Dr Tardieu’s description of

lation. Several different novelists

a male prostitute almost word for word. Admitting scientific principles

to a work of villainy and virtue should logically have created difficulties,

but notions of congenital inversion were rarely allowed to

exonerate the ‘perverts’. Almost a quarter of Dubarry’s ‘psychopatho-

[205]

Strangers
logical novel’ is taken up with a summary of the medical literature,

but a higher power decides the fate of the evil pair: at the end of the
novel, the

Count and his sister are swept away by an avalanche in

the Alps and, while clinging to a tree, are torn to shreds by eagles.

Josephin Pdadan’s La Gynandre (1891), in which the androgyne

Tammuz marries all the lesbians of Paris to replicas of himself and
forces them to worship a giant phallus to the accompaniment of the

‘Ride of the Valkyries’, shows how little this literature had to with
daily life, and how ripe it was for satire.
*

Many these books were not really about homosexuality at all.
Some gay writers - Melville, Whitman, Stoddard, Verlaine, Eekhoud
and Kuzmin - returned to the subject again and again, but without
trumpeting their intentions. Writers who broached the subject openly
tended to treat homosexuality as a minor theme. In the same year
that he wrote Monsieur Auguste (1859), Joseph Mery published ten

other works, none of which had anything to do with homosexuality.

George Thompson’s underworld dragnet turned up thieves, conmen
and gangsters as well as sodomites and lesbians. For Adolphe Belot,
‘Miss Giraud,

My Wife’ was just one exotic bloom in a vast flower-

bed of sex and crime: ‘500 Women for One Man’, ‘The Way of a

Man with a Maid’, ‘The Mouth of Madame X***’, ‘The Parricide’,
‘The Stranglers’, etc.
Perhaps the true ancestors of modern gay literature are not to be

found in belles lettres at all but in homosexual pornography, where
simple aims erased the cliches and injected some rudimentary realism

and even a sense of humour.

Homosexual pornography was far more prevalent than it seems.
Unfortunately, for obvious reasons, much of it is missing from library
catalogues. Works like Enthullungen eines garqon dLotel (Berlin, 1892),

Die Liehesfahrt eines Faderasten (Nuremberg, 1908) or Tagebuch eines
Berliner Jungen (date unknown)* survive only as titles in lists drawn

up by the German police.
*

‘Revelations of a Bellhop’; ‘The

Amorous Journey of a Pederast’; ‘Diary of a

Young Berliner’.

[206]

Fairy Tales
Pornographic books were as cosmopolitan as some of their readers.

The Power of Mesmerism. A Highly Erotic Narrative (1891), supposedly
printed in

Moscow ‘for the Nihilists’, was probably published in

Brussels and smuggled across the Channel.
Distraction de

A copy of Die Paderasten:

Vequipage (1903),* in which two bored sailors called

Jack and Bob explore each other’s bodies with surgical precision,

was rediscovered in Stockholm. Most large cities had secret distribution centres. A copy of the 1934 Don Leon (p. 184) - a limited edition
published for subscribers in London - was stamped in blue ink on
the title page, ‘Palais Royal Beaujolais Library, Paris.

NOT TO BE

TAKEN INTO ENGLAND’, and later bought in Dublin. In 1892,
the US Post Office Department (as it was then called) was destroying

Erench lesbian novels by the ton.
The audience for homosexual pornography was not necessarily
homosexual. Lesbian scenes of vampirical women and their blushing
victims were relatively common, but they catered to a male market.

As Dr Hippolyte Homo (sic) discovered in 1872 in a study of prostitution in Chateau-Gontier, young men were ‘avid for the spectacle
of female homosexuality’.
In the simple, all-embracing world of pornography, shades of
sexuality were insignificant. Most male homosexual scenes were part

of a comprehensive survey of sexual possibilities. The hero of The

Power of Mesmerism (1891) uses his power on men and women alike.
The sexual education of Charlie Roberts in The Romance of Lust, or
Early Experiences (4 vols, London, 1873-6) leaves no permutation

untested and is still selling well in the 21st century.

The main difference between these pragmatic texts and their
upmarket, moralizing equivalents is that the pornographic characters
usually enjoyed themselves.^ Genitals were the leitmotif and orgasm
*

‘The Pederasts: A Crew’s Diversion’.

This is what distinguishes Teleny (1893; latest editions, 1986 and 1995), falsely
attributed to ‘Oscar Wilde and others’, from other pornographic novels. Teleny has

^

more to do with self-loathing than sex. It supports all the most humiliating theories.

The narrator, who falls in love with a Hungarian pianist (Teleny), has hated women
ever since discovering that they have digestive systems. He rapes a female servant in

an attempt to become ‘normal’, but his first truly titillating experience is an agonizing
train-ride during which he tries to postpone a visit to the toilet. Everything is fated
to

end badly. (‘It was Kismet, as the Turks say.’) Teleny stabs himself after being

[207]

Strangers
the holy grail. Many of them also offered practical advice. The Sins

of the Cities of the Plain, or The Recollections of a Mary-Ann (London,

1881 ) was typically cheerful and instructive:

The writer of these notes was walking through Leicester Square
one sunny afternoon, last November, when his attention was particularly taken by an effeminate, but very good-looking young fellow, who

was walking in front of him, looking in shop windows from time to
time, and now and then looking around as if to attract attention.

Dressed in tight-fitting clothes, which set off his Adonis-like figure
to the best advantage, especially about
his trousers,

what snobs call the fork of

where evidently he was favoured by nature by a very

extraordinary development of the male appendage [etc.]

Along with some pseudo-scholarly essays on sodomy and tribadism.
The Sins of the

Cities

of the Plain gave information about

London

establishments, with their hours, rates and services, including a club
off Portland Place run

by a Mr Inslip - ‘a rather suggestive name,

you may think, considering the practices of the members of his club’.
The main point however was to describe the jolly adventures of the
‘mary-ann’:
‘You seem a fine figure, and so evidently well hung that I had quite
a fancy to satisfy

my curiousity [tic] about it. Is it real or made up for

show?’ I asked.
‘As real as
a

my face, sir, and a great deal prettier. Did you ever see

finer tosser in

your

life?’

he replied, opening his trousers and

exposing a tremendous prick, which was already in a half-standing
state. ‘It’s

my only fortune, sir; but it really provides for all I want, and

often introduces me to the best of society, ladies as well as gentlemen.

There isn’t a girl about Leicester Square but what would like to have
me for her man, but I did find it more to my interest not to waste my
strength on women; the pederastic game pays so well, and is quite as
enjoyable.’

found copulating with the narrator’s mother: ‘Though his face was covered with his
hands, it was Teleny. There was no mistake about it.’

Fairy Tales

Given the preponderance of smut and prudishness, it is not
surprising that when Mery’s ‘Monsieur Auguste’ looks for something
sympathetic to read, he finds the cupboard bare. Many of the texts
that have since been exhumed were unknown to readers at the time.
Even Verlaine, in 1888, saw nothing in modern literature but Balzac,
Goethe, the ‘ridiculous’ and ‘superficial’ Joseph Mery and Henri
d’Argis, whose novel, Sodome^ he was prefacing. In 1914, Magnus

Hirschfeld estimated that 7 5 per cent of homosexual men and women

had never read a book about homosexuality.
This was not just a result of State censorship. Legal intervention

was relatively rare, which, to judge by the fame of banned works like
Baudelaire’s Les Fleurs du Mai or Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of Loneliness^

was not necessarily

a

boon

for

homosexual

literature.

Eekhoud’s

Escal-Vigor (Paris, 1899), in which two noble lovers in the Hamlet-

esque castle of Escal-Vigor (a partial anagram of ‘Oscar Wilde’) are

murdered by a

mob of local women, was banned in 1900, then

translated into German and English (as Strange Love). Most gay novels

never had the chance to be prosecuted. When Jacob Israel de Haan
published his tale of two students, Pijpelijntjes (Amsterdam, 1904), his

model for the main character. Dr Arnold Aletrino,
who had defended Uranists at a medical conference, bought all the
copies they could find and destroyed them.
Many gay writers repressed their own work. Georges Eekhoud
asked his Belgian publisher to print no more than 200 copies of
fiancee and the

Le Cycle patihulaire (1892), to charge a high price, not to advertise it

and not to display it in bookstores. Eor Imre (1906) - one of the first
truly happy novels of gay love (p. 232) - Edward Prime-Stevenson
used an obscure press in Naples whose typesetters could not read
English. When the Scottish-German anarchist John Henry Mackay
issued the

first

two books of his series on ‘nameless love’ in 1906,

buyers were required to give their names and addresses and to sign a

statement saying that they were disinterested ‘lovers of art’.
Self-censorship went hand in hand with official censorship.

The

wretched end of most homosexual heroes was partly a precaution.

Even in 1960, E. M. Eorster felt that the relatively happy ending of
Maurice condemned it to oblivion: ‘If it ended unhappily, with a lad
dangling from a noose or with a suicide pact, all would be well, for

[209]

Strangers
there is no pornography or seduction of minors. But the lovers get

away unpunished and consequently recommend crime.’
Almost every scene of homosexual passion took place in or near
the grave. In La Maison de la vieille (1894) by Catulle Mendes, a male
soprano removes his clothes and lies on his friend’s cold body in an
ecstasy of passion, hoping to revive the corpse: ‘He licked his eyes,
his neck, his arms, his hands, his belly and his hips.

[.

.

.]

And, trying

to double his weight, he crushed

him with his body to make him

rebound under the pressure

It was effectively the first descrip-

‘tion in

[.

.

.].’

modern literature of a male homosexual orgasm, veiled in

pathos and futility. In D. H. Lawrence’s The Prussian Officer^ written
in 1913, the orderly and the officer lie together unclothed only on

the mortuary slab. In Howard Sturgis’s Tim:

A Story of Eton (1891),

Tim is allowed to see his beloved boyfriend Carol only when he is
completely incapacitated and dying. Dickens’ closest approach to a

gay couple - Eugene and Mortimer in Our Mutual Friend - enjoy an
unusually long death scene:
‘Touch my face with yours, in case I should not hold out till you

come back. I love you, Mortimer. Don’t be uneasy for me while you are
gone. If my dear brave girl will take me, I feel persuaded that I shall
live long enough to be married,

dear fellow.’

Miss Jenny gave up altogether on this parting taking place between
the friends [.

.

.]

Characters paid a heavy price for any episode of homosexual love.

Sodome (1888) by Henri d’Argis had a preface by Verlaine, which was
a way of advertising it to gay readers. They would have found a rare
love scene - a visit to a mine followed by a soaping session in the

pithead showers - but they would also have seen the hero end his life
as a

masturbating lunatic. In Noodlot (1890),’^ by the Dutch novelist

Louis Couperus, a gay man sabotages his friend’s marriage but later
has his head smashed to a pulp by the would-be husband, who receives
a token two-year prison sentence.

This epidemic of quasi-necrophilia was not just an attempt to
placate the censor. The sheer extent of the epidemic suggests some-

*

‘Destiny’, translated as Footsteps of Fate (London, 1891).

Fairy Tales
thing

more than

authorial

discretion.

In

twelve

European and

American novels (1875-1901) in which the main character is depicted,
often sympathetically, as an adult homosexual man, six die (disease,

unrequited love and three suicides), two are murdered, one goes mad,

one is cured by marriage and two end happily (one after six months
in prison

and emigration to the United States). The same analysis

applied to twelve lesbian novels (1870-1905) gives
toll:

th'e

following

four die (murder, suicide, meningitis and aphrodisiac abuse),

four go mad (two are drug addicts), one has a nervous breakdown,

one is cured by a man and two find satisfaction (revenge on a man
and drowning of a husband).

Compassionate authors were just as likely to make their heroes
die in torment. Karl Heinrich Ulrichs,

pamphlets, was dismal in his

fiction.

who was so dauntless in his

‘Manor’, in Matrosengeschichte

(1885), told the story of a young man who is adored by the ghost of
a dead sailor.

He drives a stake into the dead sailor’s heart, then dies

of longing. Liane de Pougy’s bestselling roman a cle, Idylle saphique
(1901) celebrates her affair with Natalie Clifford Barney but ends in
failure, ruin and remorse.

Even if all the writers of these books could easily be divided into
gay and straight, it would still be hard to find a single explanation for
the fated misery: prudence, self-punishment or realism. In

1999,

when happy endings were less implausible and censors less active, the
novelist Colm Toibm confessed to ‘an urge to have gay lives represented as tragic’, though he felt that the urge should be ‘repressed’.

Death-bed scenes in modern gay literature have roots that go far

beyond the advent of AIDS. Gay tragedy is a tradition, not just a
circumstantial feature. This

is

century gay literature was not

one of the clearest signs that 19tha

parasitic sub-section of ‘serious’

literature. It had a discreet life of its own and was far more influential

than it seems.
It is

often said that the great elegies of English literature were

written by men about men. Perhaps the implicit disapproval of society
sustained the quest for other meanings and consolations. Tennyson’s
In

Memoriam (1850) was criticized in The Times (probably by the

father of Gerard Manley Hopkins) for using language that ‘might be

addressed with perfect propriety, and every assurance of a favourable

2 I I

Strangers
young lad[y] with melting blue eyes and a passion
for novels’. In Memoriam was a favourite with many gay readers but

reception, to

[a]

also with the general Victorian public. Tennyson’s passionate love

for Arthur Hallam - which he significantly toned down in the 1870

edition - had the usual homosexual markers: Michelangelo, Shake-

speare and Socrates; clasped hands, the kiss of life and the poet

himself repeatedly described as a ‘widow’. But it was also, necessarily,

turned into
easily

a

metaphor.

It

was not just that this love could more

be expressed now that Hallam was dead, but also that death

and caution cast their love into a wider sphere and connected it with
‘the deep pulsations of the world’:

Strange friend, past, present, and to be;

Loved deeplier, darklier understood;
Behold, I dream a dream of good.

And mingle all the world with thee, (cxxix)
It

may also be that, as Balzac’s Vautrin and Proust’s Charlus suggest,

strange lovers were better adapteu to states of chaos and decay.

Charlus cheerfully turns his townhouse into a military hospital, but
this is

not just a reference to the sudden availability of handsome

foreigners in uniform. It also has to do with the sudden fragility of

the normal state of affairs. Without gay poets, the poetic record of the
First World

War in English literature would be much smaller and

more forgettable.
The Waste Land (1922) was in part an elegy to his young
friend Jean Verdenal, who died in the War - though Eliot threatened
Eliot’s

to sue the scholar who first suggested it in 1952

- but it was also a

tragi-comic celebration of that makeshift culture that spanned the
continents and the centuries and thrived among the ruins. Verlaine’s

homosexual Parsifal and his seductive choirboys, Tiresias ‘in whom
the two sexes meet’, and Sappho all appear in the same central section

of The Waste Land (w. 202-21 and corresponding notes), along with

one of those model cosmopolitans who helped to keep international
trade and literature alive:

Mr. Eugenides, the Smyrna merchant
Unshaven, with a pocket full of currants
C.i.f.

London: documents at sight.

[212]

Fairy Tales
Asked me in demotic French

To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.
*

*

Most of the books mentioned in the first part of this chapter are
just the

shopfront of a very large and miscellaneous store. Parts of

this store are

now almost inaccessible. References to homosexuality

were carefully encrypted and are becoming less decipherable as time
passes.

To understand, for instance, why a character in Walter Scott’s
Kenilworth is called ‘the infractor of the Lex Julia’, it was necessary
to know that this was the later name of a Roman law of 149 bc that

imposed a fine on homosexual male intercourse. In Le Cousin Pons,
Balzac used hints like secret marks of authentication. In his thick

German accent, Schmucke tells the young man who helps him to
bury his beloved Pons, ^Che bardacherai mon bain afec doiV, which is
supposed to mean, ‘Je partagerai mon pain avec toi!’ (‘I’ll share my
bread with you!’) But ‘bread’ becomes ‘bath’, and ‘share’ turns into a
non-existent verb based on ‘bardache’ (‘passive pederast’).

Poems were an

especially

good medium

for

secret messages.

Certain forms had private connotations: the Renaissance sonnet,
associated with Shakespeare, or the Persian ghazel, associated with

Heine even proposed ^ghaselig^ as a new word for ‘pederast’.
Verlaine and Renee Vivien used lines of thirteen syllables (the socalled vers saphique) for homosexual subjects. In poems to Rimbaud,
Hafiz.

Verlaine made all the rhymes feminine or placed the tercets above the
quatrains - an arrangement called the ^sonnet invertV or, as Huysmans

knowingly put it, the ‘arse-in-the-air’ sonnet.
In any genre, received ideas about sodomites and tribades could

be used as a kind of code. Most of these notions were either incomprehensible or insulting enough to show that the author was not an
apologist for vice. References to corrupt diplomats, a fondness for
stable lads

and grooms, beating up servants (see p. 90), destroying

flowers, parting one’s hair in the middle, or suffering from muscular

spasms could all be signs of homosexuality. Edmond de Goncourt’s

[213]

Strangers
Georges Selwyn in La Faustin (1882) has a curious illness that causes

him to crush any delicate, precious object that he holds in his hand,
Dr Lombroso claimed to be able to detect lesbians by ‘the
continual, convulsive contraction of their hands’. These cliches

just as

had a long life. Virginia Woolf’s Julia Craye was still behaving like a
19th-century lesbian in 1928: ‘She crushed [the carnation], Fanny

smooth veined hands.’ ‘What was odd in her,
and perhaps in her brother, too, was that this crush and grasp of the
finger was combined with a perpetual frustration.’
The commonest ruse was to alter the apparent sex of a character.
A surprising amount of homosexual passion was portrayed by means
felt, voluptuously in her

of this simple device.

The male objects of love in Mademoiselle de

Maupin^ Fenimore

Jack Tier (1850) or Rolfe’s The Desire and

Pursuit of the Whole (1909) may turn out to be female but, as far as

emotional realities are concerned, this is a mere technicality.
Byron’s Lara

(1814) was

the

best-known and most powerful

example of gender deception. As a teenager, Andre Gide found the
first canto

‘disturbingly interesting’ and almost blamed it for his own

peculiar feelings: ‘the

charm and the danger of these books is that

one identifies oneself too closely with the hero and absorbs his passions’. By the time the luscious page Kaled is revealed to be a

woman

(‘In baring to revive that lifeless breast, / Its grief seem’d ended, but

the sex confess’d’), it is too late: the reader has had a true taste of

homosexual passion. Even then, ‘Kaled’ keeps the secret of their love.
‘Why did she love him? Curious fool! - be still - / Is human love the

growth of human will?’

The increasingly common perception that biological sex was distinct from psychological gender made it possible to evoke this virtual

homosexuality without changing the character’s

sex.

In Rachilde’s

witty novel. Monsieur Venus (1884), published when she was twentyfour, the

amazonian Raoule (‘the Christopher Columbus of modern

love’) seduces Jacques, who has the body of a girl and the soul of a

woman. He is in effect a male lesbian and his seducer a female
sodomite. In Howard Sturgis’s Belchamher (1904), the puny Lord
Charmington, known as ‘Sainty’, is as homosexual as it is possible to
be without actually being gay.

A more risky device consisted of changing the sex of the author.
[214]

Fairy Tales
‘Michael Field’ was the joint pen-name of Katherine Bradley and her
niece Edith Cooper, who, for thirty-five years, lived together ‘the

poems were
well received until the author was discovered to be two women. MarcAndre Raffalovich used a female persona for some of his early poems,
Cyril and Lionel (1884), which allowed him to be quite explicit. But it
delicious adventure of the stranger nature’. Their love

did not prevent reviewers, including Oscar Wilde, from finding the

poems ‘unhealthy’:
Shall I never feel his mouth
(Scarlet show the lips I love)

Near as blossoms of the south.
Blooms I kiss through scented hours
Crushing sweetness from the flowers [.

.

.]

These devices were exact rhetorical equivalents of the inconveniences suffered by gay men and women in daily life:
communicating with nods and winks, changing the loved one’s gender
for the purposes of conversation, pretending to share jokes about

sexual deviance. Allegory, by contrast, operated on a different plane:
it

could create a separate world in which whole dramas were acted

out and even brought to satisfactory conclusions.

Allegory is still a contentious aspect of gay writing. To read a
work of literature as an expression of heterosexual desire is literary
criticism; to read it as an expression of homosexual desire is ‘appro-

priation’

or

‘prurience’.

Associating

it

with something in one’s

own love life is either ‘conscripting a writer for the cause’ (gay) or
‘demonstrating its universal relevance’ (straight).

Gay fables take several forms - deliberate, unconscious, and strictly
unrelated to the topic but conducive to gay readings. Some were
barely fables at all. Nineteenth-century tales of male bonding are still

being rediscovered and read as expressions of gay love. Theodore
Wmthrop’s adventurer John Brent (1862) is a Wild West pin-up, ‘the
Adonis of the copper-skins!’: ‘What a poem the fellow is! I wish I

was an Indian myself for such a companion; or, better, a squaw, to be

made love to by him’. Bayard Taylor’s Joseph and His Friend (1870)

[215]

Strangers
described ‘a new world’ beyond the Rocky Mountains ‘where men
might love each other without fear of conventional society’. It was

dedicated to those ‘who believe in the truth and tenderness of man’s
love for man, as of man’s love for woman’ (this phrase was omitted

from the British edition). Owen Wister’s ‘irresistibly handsome’ but
uncommunicative Virginian, A Horseman of the Plains (1902) becomes
a bosom buddy of the narrator when they adopt a lonely hen called

Em’ly.

Female equivalents are harder to find, though there is something
of these pioneer idylls in stories told about the Ladies of Llangollen

(Wales was sufficiently remote and misty in the English imagination),
living in their ‘fairy palace’ and ‘Arcadian bowers’ (Anna Seward).

The more exotic the setting, the more literal the dream. Charles
Warren Stoddard’s ‘In a Transport’, from South-Sea Idyls
(1873),
becomes ever more flagrant as the ship approaches Tahiti and eventually turns into something like a gay South Pacific:

Who took me in his arms and carried me the length of the cabin
in three paces, at the imminent peril of
officer cadet]

my life? Thanaron! [a French

Who admired Thanaron’s gush of nature, and nearly

squeezed the life out of him in the vain hope of making their joy

known to him? Everybody else in the mess!

[.

.

.]

And we kept doing

that sort of thing until I got very used to it, and by the time we sighted

the green summits of Tahiti, my range of experience was so great that

nothing could touch me further. It may not be that we were governed

by the laws of ordinary seafarers.

The crucial point - in fiction and, for Stoddard himself when
cruising about the South Sea islands - was the absence of ordinary
laws.

This is why children’s literature was such fertile ground for

fabulists.

The land of lost content was also a dream of future bliss.

young readers could be surprisingly
bold. Any attempt to tear away the veil of innocence might have
harmed the accuser more than the perpetrator. Even now, gay readBooks ostensibly aimed

at

ings of children’s classics are generally accepted only if the author’s
life

provides

some corroborative evidence. Horatio Alger’s tales of

city urchins are

thought to reflect the author’s inclinations because

Alger, a Unitarian minister,

was chased out of Brewster, Mass., for ,

Fairy Tales
practising ‘deeds that are too revolting to relate’ on two boys. Winnie

on the other hand, which Christopher Isherwood’s sleazy
Baron von Pregnitz clearly enjoys (p. 143), is too entwined with
the Pooh^

presexual bliss to be readily associated with adult sexuality.

The same could be said of Kenneth Grahame’s The Wind in the
Willows (1908), in which nearly all the female characters are either

unseen or non-speaking. The bachelor animals keep house, move in
with each other - an occasion usually marked with the

gift

of a

dressing-gown - but retain their independence: ‘the Mole recollected
that animal-etiquette forbade any sort of comment

on the sudden
disappearance of one’s friends at any moment, for any reason or no
reason whatever’. In the world beyond, there

is

a prison

- from

which Mr Toad escapes as a shapely washerwoman - but beyond that,
according to a seafaring rat with gold earrings, there is Marseille,
Venice, Sicily, Constantinople and the Greek islands. The god of this

cosy and sometimes frightening universe is the satyresque Piper at
the Gates of Dawn with his ‘shaggy limbs’, ‘splendid curves’ and

murmured the Rat, his eyes shining
with unutterable love. “Afraid! Of Him} O, never, never! And yet ‘rippling muscles’.

‘

“Afraid?”

and yet - O, Mole, I am afraid!”

’

The prime example of gay myth-making in childish fiction is
Howard Pyle’s The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood of Great Renown^
in Nottinghamshire (1883).

Forster saw the Merry Men as a domestic

Theban band. Pyle saw them as handsome playmates in an all-male
paradise. Maid Marion is absent and rarely mentioned. The main role
of women is to bleed poor Robin to death. (He dies in ‘Little John’s
loving arms’.) The real ‘woman’ of the Band is Allan a Dale who has
the face of a maiden and a voice that ‘charmeth all men’.

In the Greenwood, meetings between men invariably take the same

form:

a)

sexual

c) friendship,

insults;

b)

stabbing,

bashing,

wrestling,

etc.;

death or humiliation (the Sheriff of Nottingham is last

seen fleeing with an arrow in his bottom). Robin’s aggressive flirting
is

oddly relentless:
‘By my life!’ quoth Robin Hood, laughing, ‘saw ye e’er such a pretty,

mincing fellow?’
‘Truly, his clothes

have overmuch prettiness for my taste’, quoth

[217]

Strangers
Arthur a Bland; ‘but, ne’ertheless, his shoulders are broad and his loins
are narrow.’

‘Nay, but

Robin.

[.

.

.]

I

do

like

‘Prythee,

thy words, thou sweet, pretty thing’, quoth
tell

me, sweet chuck, why wearest thou that

dainty garb upon thy pretty body?’

The death-bed scene with Little John is one of the best-known
elegies of popular

gay fiction, but the Greenwood

is

otherwise a

happy place and Robin as desirable a bedfellow as any traveller might
hope to meet:

The holy friar

[.

.

.]

held the light over Robin and looked at him from

top to toe; then he felt better pleased, for, instead of a rough, dirty-

bearded fellow, he beheld as fresh and clean a lad as one could find in
a

week of Sundays; so, slipping off his clothes, he also huddled into

the bed, where Robin, grunting and grumbling in his sleep, made room
for him.

Robin was more sound asleep, I wot, than he had been for

many a day, else he would never have rested so quietly with one of the
friar’s

sort so close beside him.

Childish tales like these, with their celebrations of youth, their

bold initiations and passionate friendships, have become indistinct

with time. Novels and poems on the passing of boyhood - especially
those that referred to hazy notions of Ancient Greek ‘boy love’ -

had many themes and images in common with what now looks like
plainly paedophile literature. The popular association of paedophilia

with homosexuality made these similarities all the more misleading,

and the confusion has since been aggravated by an academic variety
of sexual relativism. An anonymous pamphlet on Boy-Worship (1880),
for instance, in which a man tries to pick up two boys in an Oxford

bookshop, was described recently as

‘a

wholly serious defence of

romantic pederasty as a mode of male romantic attachment’.

The recurring characteristics of English ‘boy-worship’ are selfdeception, trickery and bad poetry. The usual process is seduction
by flattery or gift. The aim in almost every case is sexual though the
object of desire is prepubescent: ‘The Greeks who worshipped lovely
Deplored that sprouting hair destroys / The beauty that it
boys
mars.’ (S. E. Cottam) ‘In trousers now my boy’s arrayed, / And in my
[.

.

.]

Fairy Tales
heart I’m sore afraid / This manliness will interfere / With what to

me has been so dear - My hand upon his bare knee laid.’ (F. E.
Murray) The justification by reference to ‘the Greeks’ is entirely
spurious.

Most of these poets - notably Rev. E. E. Bradford, John Gambril
Nicholson and Rev. S. E. Cottam - knew one another. Cottam,
Bradford and Bloxam, founder of The Chameleon, were all at Exeter

They exchanged poems and photographs, and
same
cliches.
Classical allusions and University degrees
recycled the
Oxford.

College,

gave a surface respectability to the stalking of underage flesh:
Smart-looking lads are in my line;

The lad that gives my boots a shine,
The lad that works the lift below,
The lad that’s lettered G.P.O.
[.

.

.]

When travelling home by tram or train
I

meet a hundred boys again.

Behind them on the ’bus I ride

Or pace the platform by their side. (Nicholson)
I sat in

the rector’s study one night,

While the rector’s wife conversed with me:
And she mentioned her child, her heart’s delight,
A boy I soon longed to see [etc.] (Cottam)
Rev. Cottam,

who could imagine that a six-year-old boy on the

beach at Worthing was looking at him ‘wistfully’, was quite open
about his hobby. One of his New Sermons for a New Century (1900),

on the subject of Christ’s expressive eyes and pregnant glances, paints
a surprising picture of his off-duty activities in London:

I

meet a young man on Highgate Hill, and from the signals of his

uplifted face I know he has caught the eye of someone at a window. I

look round to see whether I am right, and there is a girl waving her
hand.

I

overtake a small telegraph boy in Fleet Street, he seems as

pleased as Punch; I interview him, and find that someone has just given

him a big cigar.
*

[219]

Strangers

Most gay fables were not deliberate attempts to describe the
experience of being gay or even to appeal to gay readers.

They

were fantasies and recreations. Most of them have a small emotional
repertoire and simply abolish the sinister world

beyond instead of
coming to terms with it. Perhaps only one 19th-century writer used
the allegorical mask to explore the outside world. He eventually
produced such a large body of consciously homosexual literature that
he can fairly be called the Aesop of 19th-century homosexuality.
Hans Christian Andersen wrote fairy tales, not because he wanted
to make children happy (he did not especially like them), but because
the fairy tale was a magic cloak that allowed him to be himself in
public. As ‘Mother Fairy Tale’ points out in ‘The Little Green Ones’:

‘One should call everything by its right name; and if one dares not
do it as a usual thing, one can do it in a fairy tale.’

The blundering naivety that made Hans Christian Andersen something of an international nuisance was part of his professional persona.

He may have irritated his hosts with his tactlessness and hypochondria,

but he was no more innocent than his crafty tales. For the

benefit of his public, he conducted happily unrequited affairs with

women who were in no danger of succumbing to his old-maidish
charms. The ‘Swedish Nightingale’, Jenny Lind, wrote to a friend in
exasperation after years of suffering Andersen’s innocuous attentions:
‘I

need support! A man! A real, strongs healthy man!’ His erotic feelings

were reserved for men. Letters to his friend Edvard Collin might
have been used in a romantic fairy tale: ‘I long for you; yes, at this

moment I long for you as if you were a lovely Calabrian girl with
dark eyes and a glance of passionate flame.’

As an effeminate youth, Andersen had been humiliated by his
fellow workers at the cloth-mill in Odense: they stripped him bare
to find out if he was really a man. As an adult, he lived in a state of

anxious frustration. In Denmark, the death penalty for sexual offences

was not abolished until 1 866, and although the last death sentence was
passed in 1751, this effective abolition only made juries more eager
to convict. The Danish writer who translated Andersen’s first novel

into

German was forced into exile by rumours of his own homo-

sexuality.

The point of ‘The Emperor’s New Clothes’ is not that the emperor

Fairy Tales
is

pompous and gullible but that he feels himself to be an impostor:

the clothes are supposed to be ‘invisible to every person who was not
fit for the

office he held’. Even at the height of Andersen’s popularity,

there was always a chance that someone would draw attention to the
obvious, like the child in the crowd or, in the real world, the parodist

who portrayed him in 1841 as ‘the Grand Eunuch’.

Many of the Fairy Tales were written as parables of his predicament.
His first two novels had contained some plainly homoerotic scenes
of cuddling and clutching that might have struck him later on as too
revealing. The Fairy Tales showed a more cautious approach. Many

of them refer to embarrassments or calamities caused by unusual
sexual preference:

- an earthworm ‘liked the boys better’ - ‘but then it couldn’t see,
poor, miserable creature that it was’.

-

a snail’s parents try to find him a wife (not realizing, presumably,

that snails are hermaphroditic).

-

a snowman, built around a stove-brush, suffers a self-destructive

passion for the stove, which he incorrectly assumes to be ‘of the

female sex’.

-

a flighty butterfly fails to choose a bride among the flowers, turns

into ‘an old bachelor’, is caught in a net and ‘stuck on a pin in
a case of curiosities’.

-

a windmill, whose mind is a composite of man and

woman (‘they

are two, and yet one’), stands on the hill of ‘public opinion’;

despite the view, the windmill sees nothing like itself.

Abnormal desire leads either to death (the melting snowman, the
little mermaid, who serves the handsome

bachelor butterfly, the

prince as a page-boy but will never be his bride), or disgrace (the old

German bachelors of Copenhagen with their ‘eccentric’ thoughts and
habits, who are mocked by little boys and carry knives to defend
themselves against frequent attacks).

There are many other, less obvious allegories - some containing
private references to friends - like ‘The Silver Shilling’, which, though

made of silver, is not legal tender: ‘It must be terrible indeed to have
a bad conscience

[.

.

.]

if I,

who am quite innocent, can feel so badly

[

221 ]

Strangers
just because people think I

am guilty.’ Andersen himself was able to

find subtle erotic meanings in other people’s work. He objected to a

statue of himself that would have

shown a boy leaning against his

groin ‘because it reminds me of old Socrates and young Alcibiades’.

His own works were later' interpreted as gay fables, often by people
who had no idea that Andersen himself was gay.
Apart from their sheer quantity, the Fairy Tales are unlike most
other gay fables in their deliberate appeal to like-minded readers.

‘The Little Mermaid’ was written in the year of the marriage of
Andersen’s friend Collin, who would certainly have recognized the

watery transvestite who stands over the prince and his bride with a
knife in its hand. Andersen offered his readers a kind of confirmation
in ‘The Naughty Boy’ (Christmas 1835). It was a version of a pederastic

poem by Anacreon, adapted by Byron in Hours of Idleness and

later

by Frederick Rolfe in Stories Toto Told Me. During a storm, a

beautiful,

naked boy carrying a cross-bow knocks at an old poet’s

door. The poet sits the boy on his lap, dries him off and the drooping

bow-string becomes taut again.

The boy then shoots

an arrow

through the old man’s heart. The story ends with a warning about
‘wicked little Cupid’, but the obvious question remains unanswered:

with whom does the poet fall in love? Since no women are mentioned,
the boy is the only candidate.

Almost all these stories follow the tragic path of most gay fables.
Once, however, Andersen managed to negotiate a happy ending
with his imagination. ‘The Ugly Duckling’ (1842-3) may have been
inspired by memories of his trip to Italy and his sudden delight in

Naples, where Vesuvius erupted and the pimps offered customers a
choice of boys or girls.

Like

many of Andersen’s tales, ‘The Ugly Duckling’ loses its

complex iridescence in adaptations. Ugliness is not the duckling’s only
problem. Like Andersen at the cloth-mill, it encounters hostility not
because of its supposedly repulsive appearance but because its gender
is

in doubt. The old woman who adopts the duckling is significantly

confused:

‘Now I shall have duck’s eggs if only it is not a drake! We must find
out about that!’

Fairy Tales
So she took the duckling on trial for three weeks, but no eggs made
their appearance.

The farmyard in which the duckling tries to make a life for itself is
divided into male and female, with no room for anything else:
The cat was the master of the house and the hen the mistress, and
they always spoke of ‘we and the world’, for they thought that they
represented the half of the world, and that quite the better half.

The duckling thought there might be two opinions on the subject,
but the hen would not hear of it.

‘Can you lay eggs?’ she asked.
‘No!’
‘Will you have the goodness to hold your tongue, then!’

And the cat said, ‘Can you arch your back, purr, or give off sparks?’
‘No.’

‘Then you had better keep your opinions to yourself when people
of sense are speaking.’

The duckling’s peculiarity turns out to be the key to its identity.
It discovers itself, not by acquiring a mate, but by seeing its own
reflection. It finds happiness, not in a secret love-nest, but in a whole

society of migratory birds. It does not simply learn to live with its

oddness, it enters a world in which its supposed anomaly is a mark

of its superiority. The farmyard is left to express its normality in egglaying and aggressive displays. The duckling was not defective after
all,

it

simply belonged to a different species, and the ‘cure’ for its

apparent abnormality was the discovery of its ethnic roots.

Whether or not Andersen was able to spread his wings in the
homosexual underworlds of Naples, Constantinople or ‘that German
Sodoma’, Berlin, he was creating a virtual society by writing for its
invisible

members. At the same time, he was proving by his own

success

that

homosexual snowmen,

androgynous windmills

guilt-ridden shillings could be accepted and even

and

honoured in the

wider world.

The Fairy Tales are not reducible to Andersen’s sexuality, and the
idea that ‘nobody can help his birth’ is not just a coded plea for sexual
tolerance.

But they do show a homosexual sensibility illuminating

subjects of universal interest. They were a personal vindication, but

[223]

Strangers
not, of course, a call for full equality.

Gay pride was still a distant

prospect:

He felt quite shy, and hid his head under his wing; he did not know
what to think; he was so ve^ happy, but not at all proud; a good heart
never becomes proud.

*

T HE Fairy Tales would be an excellent starting-point for anyone
who wanted to show that gay writing has its own special characteristics. The slightly skewed quality of Andersen’s writing, the phrases
that sound like euphemisms, the worrying surfeit of significance, are

often reminiscent of Kafka’s techniques of self-analysis and conceal-

ment. Gunter Mecke has shown that tales like ‘Beschreibung eines

Kampfes’ (1903-4), in which the narrator falls in love with a man and
attacks

him from behind, are riddled with homosexual references,

often of the sort that were instantly comprehensible to homosexual
prostitutes

and their clients. Later tales like Der Prozefi (1914-15)

show a more intricate form of disguise.

The analogy could be extended to some of Melville’s tales, like
the bizarre ‘I and

My Chimney’ (1856), in which, despite receiving

threatening ‘anonymous letters’, a man refuses to allow his antique

chimney to be investigated in case a ‘secret closet’ is revealed: ‘Infinite
sad mischief has resulted from the profane bursting open of secret
recesses.’

Sexuality is not a skeleton key to the work of Andersen, Melville

or Kafka. The sense of shame and strange excitement comes from
the process of concealment rather than from the object that is being

concealed. This is one of the problems faced by any sexually partisan

form of criticism. Some writers, like Henry James, avoided the subject
so completely that gay readings of their work have to operate on such
deep or abstract levels that they could be applied to almost any writer.
Others, like Robert Louis Stevenson in Drjekyll and Mr Hyde (1886),
used homosexual references to create an atmosphere of unspeakable

and mysterious depravity, but without intending the character to be
seen as homosexual.
It is important in any case not to overemphasize the advantages of

[224]

Fairy Tales
writing in the dark. For many gay writers, metaphor was not a decoration or a cunning device, it was a social necessity. Classical references

could express a genuine perception of affinity with a past civilization,

but they could also be awkward circumlocutions and marks of
restraint. Cus tine’s experiences in France may have helped him to see

Russia as a despotism whose victims conspired in their own repression,
a world in which ‘everything is hidden but suspected’. The sexuality

of Marcel Proust may, as some suggested, have given him insights
into the

mind of the opposite sex. Gay writers may be better at

disguising the source of their emotions. (One of Custine’s characters
calls it ‘the infernal art of deceiving without lying’.) It could make an

otherwise banal story or poem mysteriously significant, like a spy’s
transmitter masquerading as a domestic radio. But writers generally
prefer to choose their own restraints and to create dramatic tension
in their own ways.

The benefits of concealment may be obvious to readers, and the
disadvantages of disclosure just as obvious to writers. Thom Gunn
felt

that public

knowledge of his homosexuality made some of his

poems vulnerable to reductive readings. But he did not consider the

Gay Movement a threat to his writing: ‘In my early books I was in
the closet. I was discreet in an Audenish way. If a poem referred to a
lover, I always used “you”. I figured it didn’t matter,

the poetry. But

it

did.’

it

didn’t affect

Colm Toibln, who quotes this interview,

finds the same liberation in his reading of the poems:
I

love what’s hidden between the lines of these early poems. But then

watching Gunn describe, with a freedom which is quite new, what it
is

like to

be in bed with another man in, say, ‘Jack Straw’s Castle’ is,

from the gay point of view, like being there for the Annunciation.

*

*

*

‘Gay literature’, if such a thing existed, was not just literature
produced by gay writers or devoted to the subject of homosexuality. It

was also the body of writing in which gay men and women discovered
themselves, regardless of the author’s intentions or sexuality.

From 1899, evidence that gay literature did exist was provided.

[225]

Strangers
annually,

by Magnus Hirschfeld’s journal, the Jahrbuch fiir sexuelle

Zwischenstufen. The ‘Belletristisches’ section of its bibliography listed
a

huge variety of books of possible interest to

ates’.

‘sexual intermedi-

The 1900 bibliography mentioned poems by Rimbaud and

Schwinburne {sic), Tennyson’s In Memoriam, the latest translation of
Michelangelo’s sonnets, the male prostitute episode in Huysmans’

A rebours (‘omitted from the German translation’), a novel in Czech
by Jan Karadek {Sodoma, privately printed), volume II, chapter 7 of

Anna Karenina (‘sketch of the relations between two homosexual
officers’),

and several Japanese works, including M. Sasanoya’s his-

tory of pederasty in Japan from earliest times to the introduction of

western culture: Nanskoku (Tokyo, 1893-4).

Other lists appeared in the medical literature, at first as simple
indications but increasingly as recommendations to interested readers.

Havelock Ellis’s list in Studies in the Psychology of Sex sounds like the
catalogue of a pharmaceutical wholesaler: Whitman’s Leaves of Grass

‘may be of more doubtful value for general use’, but ‘furnishes a

wholesome and robust ideal to the invert who is insensitive to normal
ideals’.

By the end of the century, it was possible to create a distinctively
homosexual interior that included a selection of significant books,
not all of which had been written two thousand years ago. Edward
Prime-Stevenson’s character Dayneford, in ‘Out of the Sun’ (1913),
has a small library in his

villa

on Capri,

its

walls ‘tinted in the

significant green’, containing about thirty different titles: the old

(Tibullus, Hafiz, Shakespeare, etc.) and the new (Whitman, Tennyson,

Rachilde, Sturgis, etc.).

Apart from their particular interest, these books had a symbolic
value. Wilde’s interior, which was cruelly exposed at the sale of his

belongings, might have appeared in a gay Better Homes and Gardens:

my Burne-Jones drawings: my Whisder drawings: my Monticelli:
my Simeon Solomons: my china: my Library with its collection of
presentation volumes from almost every poet of my time, from Hugo
[.

.

.]

to Whitman, from Swinburne to Mallarme, from Morris to Verlaine.

The Parisian home of the dandy Robert de Montesquiou gave several
novelists ideas for

homosexual settings: Persian and Japanese objets

[226]

Fairy Tales
d'^art,

bonsai trees, old family portraits, antique furniture, engravings

by Whistler, pictures of Baudelaire and Swinburne, 100 cravats in a
glass case, and ‘a slightly pederastic photograph of the gymnast from
Mollier’s Circus showing off his pretty ephebic shapes in a leotard’.

The most revealing items in gay libraries are the works that seem
not to belong. Prime-Stevenson’s ideal collection contained not only
the obvious selection of American and European novels but also three

novels by Dickens: A Tale of Two Cities, David Copperfield and Our
Mutual Friend. (If his interest had extended to lesbians, he might have

added Little Do?rit.)

The battle over Shakespeare’s sonnets shows that these ‘appropriations’ were controversial long before journalistic misrepresentations

of gay studies.

The point is not that certain characters are or are

not homosexual but that gay readers found their likeness in them.

To an invisible man, any reflection is a consolation. In A Tale of Two
Cities (1859), Sydney Carton, a bachelor consumed with self-loathing,
redeems his lonely life with an act of self-sacrifice. In Our Mutual
Friend and David Copperfield, Dickens quite deliberately left the door

open. The description of ‘Daisy’ Copperfield’s infatuation with the

bewitching Steerforth, underlined with allusions to Smollett and
the Arabian Nights, is plainly and, of course, purely homoerotic.

These adoptions were

not, as Albert

Moll

believed, a case of

arrogant self-delusion. No one thought that Victor Hugo was a closet

homosexual, but his poems were popular with gay readers. Custine

and Proust both saw reflections of homosexuality in Hugo’s persona,
‘Olympio’, who returns to the scene of his former love to find that

Nature herself is oblivious to his passion. Custine even wrote to tell

Hugo: ‘You will never know in what manner I applied your verse
[‘A Olympio’] to my own life, but you will know vaguely that there
is

a deeply suffering heart that felt itself return to life

when it

thought itself worthy of being consoled by you.’ Similarly, Edith
Simcox, who loved George Eliot ‘lover-wise’, identified herself with
Maggie Tulliver in The Mill on the Floss.
Ironically, Platen’s enemy Heinrich Heine was another favourite,
as was Alfred de Musset. Their poems were copied out and
memorized by courting couples, both gay and straight. As a child,
Proust’s character Baron de Charlus had created his own anthology

[227]

Strangers
by pretending that Musset’s poems ‘were addressed, not to a beautiful
deceiver, but to a young man’.

As Proust explains, ‘Writers should

not be offended that inverts give their heroines a male face. This
slightly aberrant peculiarity is the invert’s only means of giving what

he reads its full universal import.’ This ‘peculiarity’ is not after all
exclusively gay: Verlaine’s

poems and Goethe’s ‘An den Mond’ also

served the romantic purposes of heterosexual lovers.

Some books were popular because of their subject: novels about
married women living under cruel constraints,
especially the legend of Tristan

tales

of illicit love,

and Isolde. But the attraction was

often a particular tone: a poignant sense of exclusion and ironic
consolation, a protesting resignation, a turning of the world’s hostility
into the walls of a cosy retreat.

The instinctive perception of sympathy - even unintended - was
especially strong in music. Gay tastes were remarkably consistent.
The names of certain composers appear again and again in letters and
novels: Beethoven (sonatas), Chopin (nocturnes), Wagner {Lohengrin,
Parsifal and Tristan), Tchaikovsky (the Symphonie pathetique) and finde-siecle French composers:

Debussy, Delibes, Gounod, Massenet.

The key ingredients seem to have been a melodious melancholy
and something oxymoronic in the emotions: grandiose and
mental, ostentatious and discreet.

senti-

The sexuality of the composer

himself was not of primary importance, though both Forster and

Prime- Stevenson suggest that Tchaikovsky’s sexuality was audibly

encoded

in

the

bars

of the

Symphonie pathetique. Music could

convey quite precisely what could never be said in print. According
to Schubert’s friend Josef Kenner, his music won him ‘the heart of a

seductively amiable and brilliant young man’ (Franz von Schober)

who dragged him down into ‘the slough of moral degradation’.
Wagner’s music won him the love of Ludwig II, who, on one occasion,
spoke to him through the mouth of Wagner’s Brunhilda:

You express to me your sorrow that, as it seems to you, each one of
our last meetings has only brought pain and anxiety to me. Must I
then remind my loved one of Brunhilda’s words? ‘Not only in gladness

and enjoyment, but in suffering also Love makes man blest.’

[228]

Fairy Tales

The spontaneous translation of the dominant culture into more
congenial terms can also be seen in the emergence of gay icons. Like

Sarah Bernhardt and Judy Garland for later generations, Jenny Lind
was a gay icon and a lesbian heart-throb. Hans Christian Andersen
idolized her. J. A. Symonds looked at pictures of Jenny Lind in a bid
to cure himself of homosexuality, and the author of Autobiography of

an Androgyne called himself ‘Jennie June’ and ‘Earl Lind’ because the

soprano was ‘one of my models’.

Gay culture was not the exclusive product of professional writers
and artists. A continually updated anthology of ‘storiettes’, as Frederick Rolfe observed, could be read in public lavatories at Victoria

and South Kensington

stations. J. A.

Symonds found his feelings

expressed in classical myths but also in obscene

graffiti.

Verlaine’s

unpublished poems might have graced (and probably did) the walls
of any toilet.

We two alone, in that cafe crammed with fools.
Stood for the so-called loathsome vice of loving

Men. Those blandly-smiling imbeciles, with their
Normal romances and cheap moral standards,

Had no idea: we shat on the bastards, while
Jerking off and thrusting - to our heart’s content.

But also, it must be said, on principle [.

.

.]

Prison visitors were amazed to find homosexual love affairs openly
celebrated on prison walls. Policemen found poems in the bedrooms

and pockets of ‘pederasts’, perfectly scanned and indistinguishable

from ‘normal’ love poems. The

intricately

obscene ‘Sonnet du

trou du cul’ (‘Arsehole Sonnet’) by Rimbaud and Verlaine looks like

an avant-garde joke, but a very similar ode to the anus was quoted

by Prefect of Police

Carlier. It

master’s friend: ‘There

is

had been sent by

a thicket in

a valet to his

my soul with bushy borders,

the cage of a beautiful brown [-haired man], to whose confused song
I harken. [...]’

It

is

often said that gay

men and women are more adept at

expressing themselves than heterosexuals, or more eager to do so.

They were more likely to invent stories, to play roles, to rehearse a
variety of relationships with the rest of society. Like Quentin Crisp,

[229]

Strangers
they could find that estrangement imbued the everyday world with
novelistic charm: ‘Homosexuals have time for everybody.

[.

.

.]

Every

detail of the lives of real people, however mundane it may be, seems

romantic to them.’

There are surprising similarities between casual accounts of life as
a homosexual and published literary works.

Homosexual confessions

generally seem to have been written much later than they actually

were. Vampires, doppelgangers and weird metamorphoses were quite
routine in interviews and autobiographies of homosexuals.

J.

A.

Symonds was both a donnish scholar and a Gothic monster at large
in Victorian

London: ‘And

all

the while the

demon ravished my

imagination with “the love of the impossible”. Hallucination of the
senses crowded in upon my brain together with the pangs of shame

and the prevision of inevitable woes.’ Existential alienation was a daily
reality long before it became a literary theme. Krafft-Ebing’s case 134

might have found the world of Eranz Kafka almost naturalistic:
But who could describe my terror when, the other morning, I woke
with the feeling that I had undergone a complete transformation and
turned into a woman? [.
I

.

.]

When finally I dragged myself out of bed

sensed that an upheaval had taken place. Even during my illness, a

visitor had said, ‘He’s very patient, for a man’,

and gave me a flower

blooming in a pot, which struck me as rather strange but also made

me glad.
*

It would be easy to give the story of 19th-century gay literature

happy ending. Eor all the ghastly tales of scheming inverts and
vampirical lesbians, there were signs at the turn of the century of a
more authentic literature and a wider choice of identities. Organs
like Hirschfeld’s Jahrbuch, Adelsward Eersen’s neo-Grecian Akademos
a

and Charles Kains-Jackson’s neo-chivalric The Artist, or Journal of

Home Culture published the works of gay writers. Anthologies like
Elisar von Kupffer’s Lieblingminne und Freundesliebe in der Weltliter-

atur (1900) and Edward Carpenter’s loldus: An Anthology of Friendship

(1902) gave

some canonical authority to texts and quotations that

were already common currency among educated gays. Open celebrations of homosexual love were no longer quite so rare. The poet

[230]

Fairy Tales

Emmanuel Signoret was less inhibited, by himself or by censors, than
most 20th-century poets: in Le Livre de Pamitie (1891), his lover’s soul
was as fragrant as a daffodil, he wanted their blood to mingle and
their ‘loins’ to ‘quiver’, and their ‘burning mouths remained pressed
together for a long time’. In Claudine a Pecole (1900) and the sequel,
Claudine en menage (1902), Colette showed that a witty, intelligent
young woman could enjoy normal lesbian relations without becoming
a mindless victim or a predatory fiend.

Colette’s husband, Willy,
for the

encouraged her to spice up her novels

male audience, but the references to hothouse atmospheres

are clearly sarcastic. In one scene, Claudine talks to a ‘psychological’
novelist (based

on Marcel Prevost, who had published

a

novel,

Chonchette, about lesbians at boarding-school): ‘Yes’, he says, hoping

to tease out her secret lesbian desires, ‘the air outside has the intoxi-

cating and dangerous staleness of a greenhouse.’ Claudine answers in

her rural accent: ‘You’re right there! The corn’ll be up early, and the
oats ’n’

all!’

The novelist, she suspects, will now go about telling

people that Claudine likes only women, by which, in her opinion, he

means ‘she doesn’t like me\
This was more cheerfully realistic than fantasies like the hugely
successful soft-porn Chansons de Bilitis (1900), supposedly ‘translated

from the Greek’ by Pierre Louys. It was written for men like Marcel
Prevost who peered though steamed-up windows and wondered
what lesbians actually did with each other. The first poem described
a lesbian, as usual,

crushing flowers with her feet and making love

to a tree.

Male homosexuality began to appear without its usual

escorts.

Robert Musil’s Die Venvirrungen des Zdglings Tdrlefi (1906) and D. H.
Lawrence’s The White Peacock (1911) present it as an aspect of human
life

instead of making it the prize exhibit. Thomas Mann’s Death in

showed that the euphemisms applied to homosexual
love could also be used to evoke other unnameable things - death,
Venice (1912)

the unconscious mind, the murky origins of art.

Even in openly homosexual novels, happiness became slightly less
unusual. Forster’s Maurice (1913-14)

may have been a sign of the

times rather than a solitary dream. Tv\^o gay novels published in 1906

both had hopeful endings. Prime-Stevenson’s Imre is

[231]

a love story

^

Strangers
doubling as a gay travel guide and handbook. Passion is quite undisguised. An Englishman called Oswald meets a Hungarian lieutenant
called Imre. They battle through the long process of self-revelation

and are last seen blissfully strolling along the Danube to the nervethrilling

sounds of a gypsy orchestra. In Kuzmin’s Wings the hero

goes to Italy, decides to live with an older man, and, at the end of
the novel, ‘opens a window onto a street flooded with bright sunlight’.

That window would soon be closed. The grim trends in the legal
and medical treatment of homosexuality are just as evident in litera-

The extraordinary fuss made about Alec Waugh’s The Loom of

ture.

Youth (1917) show's how unbroachable the subject became, at least in
Britain. Waugh’s vague hints of ‘ugly things’ and ‘friendships [.

.

.]

too

romantic to last’ (Byron) were hardly a sign of growing confidence.

A similar trend could be seen in lesbian literature. It says a lot about
the lack of lesbian writing - and the self-image of lesbians - that the
national lesbian organization, the Daughters of Bilitis, took its

first

name from the cliche-ridden sleaze of Pierre Louys.
As

Lillian

Faderman points

out,

Christina

Rossetti’s

‘Goblin

Market’ (1862) and Thomas Hardy’s Desperate Remedies (1871) contained exciting scenes of sexual passion between women, yet neither

work was banned. In Radclyffe Hall’s theoretically optimistic but
depressing The Well of Loneliness (1928), which was banned, the joys

of lesbian sex were crammed into a tiny half-sentence and denied the

power of speech. Happiness and silence now went hand in hand:
Stephen bent down and kissed Mary’s hands very humbly, for now she
could find no words any more

.

.

.

and that night they were not divided.

9

Gentle Jesus

‘the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge’

Ephesians 3:19

E

ven in religious matters, the 19th century is much more
recent than we think. We now know that not all Victorians were

ardent church-goers.

Many people were happy to lose their faith

and embraced atheism without suffering any social consequences.
Christianity still loomed large in most minds, and especially in homosexual minds, but it was not impossible, at least in private, to reconcile

Christian belief with illicit love.

A minister known to Magnus Hirsch-

feld saw no contradiction in his human and spiritual passions: if God

had made him that way, he must have had a purpose. Ulrichs told his
sister that it would be ‘extremely unChristian’ to ask

God to perform

a miracle and turn him into a lover of women.

Ironically, homosexual priests were less likely than most to consider

themselves exceptional. According to Hirschfeld, every confessor

knew ‘thousands’ of homosexuals. On the other hand, some people

who were

otherwise

untroubled

by religion were tortured by

unanswerable questions: Why were only certain kinds of love acceptable to the religion of love?

Why were they created with feelings that

the Creator himself condemns?

The teaching of all Christian churches was unambiguous: sodomites were evil. They might even bring down the wrath of God on

[233]

Strangers
whole communities. The savage god who wiped out the Cities of the
Plain did not launch his strikes with pinpoint accuracy. In 1750,

the Bishop of London warned Londoners that the recent earthquakes
felt in the capital had been caused by ‘the unnatural Lewdness, of
which we have heard so much of late’. Similar warnings are still being

issued today.

AIDS has often been described as a biblical scourge,

and some right-wing evangelists in the United States held gays and
lesbians partly responsible for the destruction of the

World Trade

Center.

These extreme expressions of conservative dogma now sound like
paranoid delusions, though metaphysical fears were and

still

are

widely reflected in private convictions. Many Christian homosexuals
faced a wall of prejudice that began in the courtroom and ended in

heaven. They lived and died with the contradiction of a God who

made a certain kind of love a qualification for everlasting torment.
But even the people officially referred to as ‘sodomites’ could have a
profound effect on religious practice and belief, often in ways that
still

seem unacceptable to many Christians.
*

Christian condemnations of homosexual
reflected the mores of a particular society.

love

have always

When Philo of Alexandria

imagined the Sodomites indulging in ‘strong liquor, dainty feeding

and forbidden forms of intercourse’, he was describing the Hellenistic

ways of his contemporaries: ‘They accustomed those who were by
nature men to submit to play the part of women, and saddled them

with the formidable curse of a female disease.’
Philo was not elucidating a passage of Old Testament scripture;

he was attacking the sexual underworld of first-century Alexandria.
Similarly, St Paul’s allusions to homosexuality say more about life in

certain parts of the Roman Empire than they do about the teachings

of Christ:
Their women did change the natural use into that which is against
nature:

And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the

woman, burned in their lust one toward another. (Romans 1:26-7)
This was not the rural Judaea of the twelve

[234]

disciples,

it

was the

Gentle Jesus
cosmopolitan playground described

a

few years

later

by Juvenal,

Martial and Lucian:
‘You’re surely not a hermaphrodite’, said I, ‘equipped both as a man

and a woman, as many people are said to be?’ [.
said,

‘I

.

‘No, Leaena’, she

.]

was born a woman like the rest of you, but I have the mind

and the desires and everything else of a man.

[.

.

.]

Just give

me a

chance, and you’ll find I’m as good as any man; I have a substitute of

my own.’ (Lucian, Dialogues of the Courtesans, 5)
Several different Jesuses coexisted in the early years of Christianity.

The anti-sodomitical Christ of Paul and Philo was competing

with alternative versions of himself. Paul, for instance, was not just
chastising a group of versatile fornicators, he

may also have been

combating a belief held by some early Christians that sexual acts
could serve a religious purpose. (As 19th-century missionaries and
explorers discovered, this belief was not peculiar to early Christianity.)

Over a century later, Clement of Alexandria was trying to eradicate
A gnostic sect which prayed to images of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and a portrait of Jesus supposedly commissioned
by Pontius Pilate had incorporated pederastic love into a baptismal

just such a heresy.

rite.

They justified their ‘unspeakable teachings’ with an expanded

version of Mark’s gospel dating from the first century (the so-called
Secret Gospel of Mark). Clement quoted it in a letter {c.

180 ad):

And going in immediately where the young man was, [Jesus] stretched
out his hand and raised him up, taking him by the hand. The young
man looked on him and loved him, and began to beseech him that he
might be with him. They came out of the tomb and went into the
young man’s house, for he was rich. After six days Jesus laid a charge
upon him, and when evening came the young man comes to him, with
a linen robe thrown over his naked body; and he stayed with him that
night, for Jesus was teaching him the mystery of the kingdom of God.

Clement was not doubting the authenticity of the Gospel; he
was opposed to the dissemination of dangerous teachings which, in
his view,

were intended for an elite. This cautious, discriminating

approach to divine wisdom is not peculiar to the early Church. In
1989, a report secretly commissioned by the House of Bishops of the
Church of England found that there was no biblical justification for

[235]

Strangers
not supporting ‘permanent homosexual relationships’. The report was
suppressed, however, not because of theological disagreement, but

because

it

was

that the findings

felt

would be ‘disturbing to the

faithful’.

Biblical texts

especially in

have always been tailored to

sexual

matters.

As the English

fit

social prejudice,

barrister

Humphry

Woolrych pointed out in 1832, sodomy was always the great exception: ‘The immediate execution of the Sodomite or unnatural person’
is

ordered by Leviticus, ‘but in the very same chapter, there is an

equal denunciation against adultery, cursing of mother and father,
soothsaying, incantations and diviners’. Why, then, he wondered,
were children who insulted their parents not also executed, along

with fortune-tellers and adulterers?

Recent discussions in Britain of Section 28 of the Local Govern-

ment Act

(1988),

which makes

it

illegal

for

schools

and

local

authorities to ‘promote homosexuality’, have revealed a persistent
belief that conservative public opinion and biblical teaching are more

or less identical.

It is still

widely assumed, for instance, that Jesus

condemned homosexuality.
*

Depictions of a homosexual Christ are often seen as the ultimate
act of gay impudence. Modern examples include the poem by James

Kirkup in which a centurion makes love to the crucified Christ and

which led to the prosecution of Gay News in 1911 * and Terrence
McNally’s play. Corpus Christi (1997), based on a real incident, in

which the Jesus figure, a native of Corpus Christi, Texas, is crucified
as ‘king of the queers’.

Sexually ambiguous Messiahs belong to a tradition

much older

than the Christian Church. Relatively few have been the work of
flippant provocateurs

and sneering blasphemers. Most modern gay

Christs were serious attempts by homosexual men and, more rarely,

women to find a way in to the fortress of Christian dogma and to
*

Kirkup’s poem, ‘The

Love that Dares to Speak Its Name’, is still banned in
However, it can easily be found on the Internet,

Britain and the United States.

despite frequent changes of web address.

Gentle Jesus
solve the painful riddle. Eloquent expressions of religious despair are

common in letters and confessions:

0 God and Father, if You really exist, why are You doing this to me,
and if this is the sin for which I must atone, why do You not forgive

me? (‘Sufferer from perverse sexual orientation’, quoted by a German
forensic doctor, 1873)
1

am hundreds

of years

old

in

this

my wretchedness

of every

moment. I cannot battle against Love and crush it out - never! God
has implanted the necessity of the sentiment in my heart; it is scarce
possible not to ask oneself why has He implanted so divine an element

my nature, which is doomed to die unsatisfied, which is destined in
the end to be my very death? (Ms. of an unknown ‘Urning’, quoted
in

by Edward Carpenter, 1908)

Eor some, the answer was to abandon the Church. Edward Carpenter, who was ordained in 1 869, ‘unfrocked’ himself five years later,
partly to end the ‘crucifixion’ of his ‘physical needs’. Clive Durham,
in Eorster’s Maurice^ also sheds the religion of his childhood like an

old suit:

He wished Christianity would compromise with him a little and
searched the Scriptures for support. There was David and Jonathan;
there was even the ‘disciple that Jesus loved’. But the Church’s interpretation

was against him; he could not find any rest for his soul in her

without crippling it, and withdrew higher into the classics yearly.

Not everyone could take comfort in a classical education, or forge
a substitute faith, as

Carpenter did, from the sunshine of Italy, the

poetry of Walt Whitman and the conversation of friends like W. K.
Clifford, whose ‘inverted Doxology’ sounded like a hymn of hope:

O Father, Son and Holy Ghost We wonder which we hate the most.
Be Hell, which they prepared before.
Their dwelling now and evermore!
Liberation from conformity was an intellectual luxury. For many,

death seemed the only solution. ‘The only exit for a soul thus plagued
is

suicide’, wrote J. A. Symonds,

who managed to adjust his faith and

[237]

Strangers
eventually felt more remorseful about his bogus marriage than about
his sexuality.

Men who took refuge in the Church, or who mistook

their lack of sexual interest in women for a vocation, often found that

they had simply turned themselves into hypocrites. The boy-loving
curate of John Bloxam’s tale, ‘The Priest and the Acolyte’, which was

mentioned in the Wilde trials as ‘a disgrace to literature’, finds an
ideal setting for his soul in the ‘artistic beauty’ of the High Church
service,

but peace of mind eludes him, as he tells his rector: ‘In the

sight of God

my soul is blameless; but to you and to the world I am

guilty of an abominable crime.’

The suicidal clergyman was - and still is - one of the commonest
images of homosexual anguish. As Havelock Ellis wrote in 1897,
everyone had heard of cases, or read about them in newspapers, ‘in

which distinguished men in various fields, not seldom clergymen,
suddenly disappear from the country or commit suicide in conse-

quence of some such exposure or the threat of it’. Their deaths were
usually imputed to fear of discovery and interpreted as a tribute to

normality, but they were surely in many cases the logical conclusion

of a hopeless internal debate. Even the exceptional A. E. Eorrest,

who had sex with so many boys on Santa Cruz (Solomon Islands)
in the

1

890s that his bishop thought the mission utterly ruined, was

eventually driven to suicide in 1908 and was ‘remembered among the
locals as the white

man who was hounded to death by vindictive

Christians’.
*

Some independent souls, however, scoured the Bible, like W. C.
Eields, ‘looking for a loophole’, and were surprised to find that Jesus

never condemns sodomy. He does refer to the fiery fate of Sodom and

Gomorrha, but only as a general reminder of the Day of Judgment or
as a warning to those who fail to welcome the disciples:

And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against

them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and

Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. (Mark 6:11)
Eor Jesus, as for a minority of later theologians, the Sodomites’ sin

[238]

Gentle Jesus
was a breach of the law of hospitality rather than an unholy form of
intercourse. This was not an original reading. In Genesis and Judges,

the attempted homosexual gang rape of foreign visitors is the form
that the crime of inhospitality happens to take. The story of Sodom
is not,

according to one view, a specific condemnation of sodomy, any

more than the rape of the maids of Judah (Lamentations 5:11) implies
a ban on heterosexual relations. According to Ezekiel, the Sodomites
were proud, greedy, idle and selfish people, but not, apparently, sexual
perverts. The Book of Wisdom defines their crime as ‘bitter hatred

towards strangers’.

The routine association of Sodom with the act of sodomy was a
much later development and did not become widespread until the late
14th century. Even then, as Jeremy Bentham pointed out, referring
to the Levite episode in Judges 19, there was surely some consoling

precedent in the fact that ‘the concupiscence of a whole male population’ could be ‘kindled to madness by a transient glimpse of a single

man’. In such a country,

‘is

it

possible that the nature of that love

which had place between David and Jonathan would be matter of
doubt?’

Careful readers of the Gospels might even detect signs of active
tolerance or at least the glimmer of a compromise.

To some 19th-century readers, Jesus did appear to show unusual
regard for men who were considered ridiculously or reprehensibly
effeminate. In Matthew 19, after agreeing that some people will find
it

easier than others to avoid fornication, Jesus mentions three varie-

ties

of eunuch - those

who were castrated, those who castrated

themselves ‘for the kingdom of heaven’s sake’, and an unidentifiable
variety, perhaps hermaphroditic or simply impotent: ‘eunuchs, which

were so born from their mother’s womb’. It is entirely defensible to
see this as a reference to homosexuality. In the 2nd century, Clement

of Alexandria and the gnostic philosopher Basilides defined this

category of eunuch as men who naturally ‘turn away from women’.

The more subtle or tenuous historical arguments seem to be quite
recent, though they must have occurred to readers long before they

were able to put the arguments in print. At Bethany, Jesus sends two
disciples into the city to find the house where the Last Supper will

take place. They are to look for ‘a man bearing a pitcher of water’ -

Strangers
in other words a man who would be distinguished from the Passover

crowd by his effeminate behaviour. (Only women fetched water.) At

Capernaum, a Roman centurion begs Jesus to heal a sick servant ‘who
was dear unto him’. Marvelling at the centurion’s faith, Jesus performs
the miracle at a distance. Matthew calls the ‘servant’ pais (boy); Luke
calls him doulos (slave). Both Gospels were probably written in Antioch

of Syria, where the exceptional concern of a Roman centurion for a
sick slave-boy would have had clearly erotic overtones.

None of this amounts to acceptance of homosexual love, and it
would take an unusually determined anachronist to make a blind,
backw^ard leap of faith over 2,000 years of social change and to claim
that Jesus himself was either homosexual or heterosexual. But it does

show that the Gospels contained the elements of a rational, Christian
defence of same-sex love. Church doctrine was not the final word.
Earl Lind, in questioning St Paul’s

sex doctrines’, happily

‘false

observed that
Jesus

made no such blunders in his sex teaching. He was the only

biblical teacher apparently to recognize the existence

of androgynes

without thundering against them. As ‘eunuchs from their mother’s

womb’, he may of course have had in mind only anaphrodites [asexuals].
But apparently he was aware of the existence of androgynes, St John
the Divine,

apparently his favorite disciple, having possessed the

earmarks, particularly ‘softness’ of disposition.

Along with David and Jonathan and their ‘wonderful’ love ‘passing
the love of women’ (2 Samuel 1:26), the

‘soft’

apostle has always

been the main focus of homosexual attention. John

is

repeatedly

described (in John’s Gospel) as ‘the disciple whom Jesus loved’. At
the Last Supper, he talks to Jesus while ‘leaning on his bosom’ or
‘lying on his breast’. King James I had no doubt about the meaning

of this love. In 1617, six years after the publication of the Bible that
bears his name, James defended himself in the Privy Council against

the charge of sodomy. His openly erotic relations with his ‘sweet
child

and wife’, George Villiers, were correctly thought to imply

an even more shameful private life. James decided to invoke divine
authority:

‘Jesus Christ did the same,

and therefore

I

blamed. Christ had his son John, and I have my George.’

[240]

cannot be

Gentle Jesus
Whatever its
provocative

theological value, James’s defence was not just a

personal

fantasy.

A few years

before,

Christopher

Marlowe had been accused of claiming ‘That St John the Evangelist
was bedfellow to Christ and leaned alwaies on his bosom, that he
used him as the sinners of Sodoma’. The notion that Jesus and John
loved one another like husband and wife had been a theme of early
medieval literature and iconography. This cheerful notion might
have been driven underground by dogma and morality, but it was
constantly being rediscovered.
*

The 18th and 19th centuries saw the greatest proliferation of
alternative Christs since the dawn of Christianity. Androgynous and

even homosexual Jesuses emerged, along with

many others, from

the secular reassessment of the Gospels that culminated in David

Friedrich Strauss’s brutally forensic Das Lehen Jesu (1835-6; translated

by George Eliot in 1846), and Ernest Renan’s more tactful

Vie de

Jesus (1863).

The historical approach to holy scripture is often associated with
a devastating loss of faith: if Jesus was rooted in a particular culture,

how could his teachings be universal? But for some, the secularization
of Jesus had the effect of stripping away the layers of tradition to
reveal a pristine, ‘real’ Jesus, who could then be dressed, of course,

who fights for the oppressed,
who exploits the poor, the Messiah of material
progress, or the Romantic atheist who prays to an empty sky.
in other clothes: the socialist Jesus

the capitalist Jesus

Because of the inflammatory nature of the idea, the homosexual
Jesus had a less public career than the others. But the fact that the
idea was expressed at all suggests that there was a great deal of private

meditation on the subject. A starting-point for some might have been
a surprising passage in Diderot’s Essai sur la peinture (1765; published

in 1796).

Diderot invited his readers to imagine how much warmth

and beauty the Gospel figures would gain ‘if our artists were not
enchained and our poets constrained by those terrible words - sacrilege and profanation’:
[.

.

.]

if Christ, at the wedding at Cana, tipsy and a little nonconformist,

[241]

^

Strangers
had run his eye over the breasts of a harlot and the buttocks of Saint
John, wondering whether or not he would remain faithful to the apostle

whose chin bore the first wispy growth of beard

[.

.

.]

then you would

see how differently we would regard the beauty to which we owe the

grace of our redemption.

Diderot was not making claims on behalf of a repressed minority.

He was trying to rescue religious subjects from censors and hypocrites. His sexually indecisive Messiah was a pleasantly normal

human

being, susceptible to the full range of human emotions.

Less public texts were more specific. Frederick the Great wrote in
a

poem that John had gained access to Jesus’s bed by acting as his

‘Ganymede’. Stendhal wanted to make this love affair the subject of

which Jesus - who ‘never made his mother unhappy by
preferring another woman’ - would ‘turn to his own advantage the
a play in

doctrine of Socrates’.

In a

more scholarly vein (but still in private), Jeremy Bentham

observed that, like David’s love for Jonathan, the love of Jesus and

John was clearly presented as being ‘of a different sort from any of
which any of the other of the Apostles was the object’. Alerted by an
intriguing reference in the Monthly Magazine of September 1811 to
‘the episode of the cinaedus’ (catamite) in the Garden of Gethsemane,
Bentham suggested that the young man with a linen cloth over his
naked body who flees from the soldiers (Mark 14:51-2) was a ‘rival
or a candidate for the situation of rival to the Apostle’ John. This is
interestingly reminiscent of the young man ‘with a linen robe thrown

over his naked body’ in the Secret Gospel of Mark which was not
discovered until 1958.

By hinting at the erotic nonconformity of Jesus, Bentham was
trying to remove ‘that cloud of prejudice by which this part of the
field

of morals has to this time been obscured’. He was concerned,

not with theological accuracy, but with ‘the greatest happiness of the
greatest number’.

Narrower political aims produced more lurid images. In a satire
pretending to be a petition to the French National Assembly in 1790,
the ‘Children of Sodom’ demanded the right to practise the science

of ‘antiphysics’, ‘which its detractors derisively call buggery’. This

Gentle Jesus
‘sweetest of mysteries’ was after all revealed to mortals by the Son of

God:
Has not [Jesus], moved by the most tender affection for his younger
cousin, led us all, such as we are, down the path of knowledge? Has
he not shown us the primary elements of this preference, which fools
have called monstrous and bizarre, but whose divine essence we have
The dying Jesus, who suffered the same fate as our
recognized?
brother Paschal* - death on the bed of honour - used to say to St
John: ‘Come, my son; come, my beloved, rest your head on my chest.’
Can we doubt the true essence of these tender expressions?
[.

.

.]

This was a sarcastic attack on the regime that was about to decriminalize sodomy, but the same idea was also expressed by supporters of

the Revolution.
lique^

A brazen, priest-bashing text of 1790, Bordel aposto-

claimed, in the vigorous idiom of the Revolution, that ‘St John

used to bugger the Virgin’s son’. In his revolutionary phase, the

Marquis de Sade also referred to what was evidently a common theme
in some quarters, though only Sade, it seems, came up with the idea

that the

boy Jesus had ‘performed certain services - doubtless very

libertine - for the priests of the temple at Jerusalem’.

Antireligious blasphemies like these were not just devious inventions of literary minds. There seems to have been a popular tradition

of innuendo which survived in homosexual slang until the early 20th
century. An ^apotre^ (apostle) was a sodomite, a

or petit jesus'

^Jesus'"

^

(roughly equivalent to ‘pretty boy’) was a male prostitute, and ^faire le
saint Jeard was to make a discreet bow as a sign to other homosexuals.

Not all anticlericalism was irreligious. Many of the mystical sects
that sprang up in early- 19th-century France associated the division

of humanity into male and female with social inequality and revived
the ancient Christian notion of androgynous perfection, for which

Paul himself could be quoted as an authority.^ In the 1 840s, devotees

The last sodomite burned alive in France (1783).
There is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in Christ Jesus’
(Galatians 3:28). The Gospel of Thomas (discovered in 1945) attributes the notion
to Jesus: ‘Jesus said to them, “[.
when you make the male and the female one and
*

^

.

.]

the same, so that the male not be male nor the female female

enter [the kingdom].”

’

(Thomas 22)

U43]

[.

.

.]

then you will

Strangers

new religion called Evadisme (‘Eve’ + ‘Adam’) worshipped a
bisexual god and followed a man who called himself ‘the Mapah’
of a

H^maman' +

which

all

‘papa').

Charles Eourier described an ideal society in

forms of sexual congress would be practised, including

‘monosexuality’, and in which ‘unisexual orgies’ would be officially

sanctioned. The Saint-Simonians thought that the Son of God should
also be known as the Daughter of God.
It

was under the influence of Saint-Simonian ideas that, in the

mid- 19th century, the painter Rosa Bonheur discovered striking evidence of Jesus’s androgyny. It occurred to her (as it had a century
before to the German pietist, Ludwig von Zinzendorf) that the red,

tender wound in Jesus’s side was a visual euphemism. This crucial

image of Christian iconography was in fact a representation of the
vagina, as

some surprisingly detailed medieval paintings suggested.

The masculinity of the adult Jesus was veiled by a loin-cloth, but his
femininity was openly displayed.

An androgynous Christ was not, of course, a proto-homosexual,
but the perception of his sexual ambiguity made it easier to find a
place for homosexuality in Christian tradition.

The historical con-

tinuities identified by Winckelmann’s Geschichte der Kunst des Altertums

(1764), Pater’s Studies in the History of the Renaissance (1873) and
Erazer’s The Golden

Bough (1890-1915) allowed imaginative bridges

to be built between the Classical and Christian worlds. The effeminate
features of Greek gods and heroes - Orpheus, Dionysus and Apollo

- were seen to have survived in early images of Christ. To generations

who began the school day with the Gospels and continued with
Homer, Horace and Virgil, this was not entirely inconceivable.
Philosophical parallels confirmed artistic similarities. If Socrates

could be seen as a pre-Christian, then Jesus could be seen as a latter-

day Greek. In the Hellenistic Oxford of Benjamin Jowett and Walter
Pater, the Christ-like qualities of Socrates - and the Socratic qualities

of Christ - were

a

common theme, despite increasingly nervous

awareness of what Gladstone called ‘those shameless

lusts,

which

formed the incredible and indelible disgrace of Greece’. In W. H.
Mallock’s satire on effete Oxford Hellenists, The New Republic (1877),

an undergraduate’s sonnet enfolds Narcissus, Venus and Christ in the

same ‘yearning’: ‘of these three / I knew not which was fairest’. Three

[244]

Gentle Jesus
years later, the sonnet was quoted in all seriousness in the pamphlet,

Boy-Worship (Oxford, 1880). ‘Our yearning tenderness for boys like
these / Has more in it of Christ than Socrates’, said the Rev. E. E.

Bradford in The New Chivalry and Other Poems (1918). This was not
just

an academic theme. In poems written in the 1850s and 1860s,

Walt Whitman associated Jesus with Hermes, Hercules, Socrates, ‘the
full-limb’d Bacchus’, and a beautiful boy soldier.
The intercontinental sweep of Whitman’s all-embracing odes was
unusual for the time. Most consciously homosexual depictions of a
‘Greek’ Jesus date from the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The
novelist Jean Lorrain imagined

him in 1893

as a

hermaphroditic

Cupid, a beardless, heavy-lidded Adonis with ‘a kind of ambiguous
charm’. The American Catholic, ‘R.

S.’,

quoted in Havelock Ellis’s

Studies in the Psychology of Sex, thought that Jesus should look like

‘some Praxitelean demigod or Elandrin’s naked, brooding boy’.*

He might have appreciated the soft-porn painting, UEcole de Platon
(1897), by the Belgian symbolist Jean Delville.

Swathed in a pinkish

robe and flanked by twelve nude disciples with body-builder muscles,
‘Plato’ is obviously supposed to be Jesus Christ.

Examples are too scarce to allow for much chronological precision,
but there is some evidence for the earlier spread of the idea in a
rearguard action. In Amour et Manage (1858) and his Gospel com-

mentaries (1866), Proudhon complained that an ‘odious aspersion’

had been cast on the love of Jesus and John. In his opinion, the
Gospel love story was ‘a Christian imitation of Greek love’. John

was a dreamy, Platonic Jew who wanted to win a place for himself
and Jesus in the pantheon of male lovers: Socrates and Alcibiades,
Alexander and Hephaestion, etc. ‘John is the Antinous of Christ.’ As
if alarmed

by his own insight, Proudhon insisted however that their

relations were pure: ‘The Jews were lascivious, but not pederastic.’

Renan’s Vie de Jesus (1863) also shows signs of a silent controversy.

He claimed that Jesus’s affection for John was exaggerated by John’s
acolytes,

*

and denied, significantly, that Jesus had ‘any knowledge of

Hippolyte Flandrin’s Jewwf homme nu assis sur un rocher (1835-6) and photographs

of Praxiteles’ statue of Hermes, discovered in 1877, were common gay icons of the
late

19th century.

Strangers
Greek culture’. The ‘Orient’ was different in those days, according
to Renan:

men and women mixed more freely. ‘Women, in fact,

welcomed Jesus eagerly.’ Jesus was such a perfect gentleman that he
was able to establish ‘a very tender intellectual union between the

two sexes’. For Renan, a sensual, heterosexual Jesus was preferable to
any sort of homosexual Christ.
*

The artistic ostentation

and philosophical ingenuity of
most paintings and published texts may be untypical of private fantasies,

but they do suggest that Jesus was often the object of intense,

personal

communion. As Marc-Andre Raffalovich explained to the

medical and legal readers of his Uranisme et unisexualite (1896): ‘The
sacred and tender love of one’s fellow man, the love of the young,

naked, bleeding god

[.

.

.]

fills

Uranists

[.

.

.]

with understandable

enthusiasm.’

The beautiful young man with long hair and loving gestures, whose
passionate writhings adorned church walls and were admired in

museums, was a ubiquitous image. As if by some extraordinary good
fortune, this icon of male loveliness was mass-produced and publicly

displayed by a society that was otherwise intent on reinforcing a

heterosexual norm. And, as many people realized, the faces and bodies

of some of the best-known Gospel figures had been objects of desire
as well as models.

A photograph of a Florentine or Sicilian boy might

be compromising, but no one could easily object to a reproduction
of one of Caravaggio’s languorous Christs or of Andrea del Sarto’s

profoundly winsome John the Baptist.

The ‘enthusiasm’ referred to by Raffalovich was not necessarily
profane. Homoeroticism was quite compatible with religious fervour.

One day, after returning from the Bibliotheque Nationale to his
room in Montmartre, Max Jacob had a vision of Christ and wrote a
passionate ode to his dead body, reminiscent of the banned centurion

poem by James Kirkup. In both cases, necrophiliac desire prefigures
the Resurrection:

Oh! if only I could bring you back to life, my beloved. You are even
more handsome than before, my darling. I never want to leave you. I

[246]

Gentle Jesus
like to feel your body in

my arms.

[.

.

Your stomach is hard - that’s

.]

what most surprises one in a corpse.

never noticed before what

I

delicate feet you had.

There was a similarly ecstatic blend of sexual and metaphysical
yearning in Gerard Manley Hopkins’ earnest evocation of the physical
Jesus in a sermon preached at Leigh in Lancashire in 1879.

High

Church Anglicanism might have allowed homosexual desire to be
sublimated, but it could still appear in public with very little disguise:
In his body he was most beautiful.

[.

.

.]

They tell us that he was

moderately tall, well built and tender in frame, his features straight

and beautiful,

his

hair inclining to

auburn, parted in the midst,

curling and clustering about the ears and neck as the leaves of a filbert,
so to speak,

upon the nut. He wore also a forked beard and this as

well as the locks upon his head were never touched by razor or shears;
neither, his health being perfect, could a hair ever fall to the ground.
[.

.

.]

I

leave

it

to you, brethren, then to picture him, in

whom the

fullness of the godhead dwelt bodily, in his bearing how majestic, how

strong and yet how lovely and lissome in his limbs, in his look
how earnest, grave but kind. In his Passion all this strength was spent,
this lissomeness crippled,

this

beauty wrecked,

this

majesty beaten

down. But now it is more than all restored, and for myself I make no
secret I look forward with eager desire to seeing the matchless beauty

of Christ’s body in the heavenly light.

In earlier years, Hopkins had had ‘evil thoughts’ while sketching a
crucified arm. A crucifix belonging to his Aunt Kate had stimulated
him ‘in the wrong way’. Yet the beautiful, never-balding Jesus of his
sermon was not a cynical, self-gratifying fantasy. It was part of a
lifelong attempt to find a liturgy through which his own kind of love

could be expressed and devoted to God.

Many examples of what would later be seen as crude appropriations
belong to this quest for accommodating rituals. In Frederick Rolfe’s

Hadrian the Seventh (1904), George Arthur Rose, after long years in a

suburban lodging-house attic, is elected Pope and sets about renewing
Catholic ritual in line with his own peculiar tastes. Commissioning
a

new cross, he shows the goldsmith the hermaphroditic Antinous

of the Belvedere (another popular gay icon): ‘The cross will be of the

[247]

Strangers
kind called Potent, elongate: the Figure will combine the body and
limbs of the Apoxyomenos* with the head and bust of the Antinous.’

The Rev. Samuel Cottam, whose mind seems to have wandered
quite freely during his sermons (see p. 219), thought of the official
cult of

Emperor Hadrian’s drowned

lover,

‘the

everglorious lad’

Antinous (d. 122), as the religion that might have been: ‘Antinotis
was within an ace of becoming the god of the modern world. We

may say it was only the divinity of Christ which prevented this.’
‘R. S.’ had an even more ambitious arrangement in mind when he
told Havelock Ellis of his personal theology. He appears to have been

myth of male procreation, the all-male
family of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the erotic connotations
of holy communion:
thinking of the Christian

[.

.

.]

when I realized that homosexually it was neither lawful nor

possible for me to love in this world, I began to project my longings
into the next.

From the doctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, and Eucharist, I have
drawn conclusions which would fill the minds of the average pietist
with holy horror; nevertheless I believe that (granting the premises)
these conclusions are both logically and theologically defensible.

Theological argument was often quite irrelevant.

Not all these

remodellings of Christ were Christian. Anyone with the desire and
the imagination could weave their own experiences into the story of
Jesus. Prime -Stevenson wrote about Christ’s ‘vivid attraction to total
strangers’, as if the gathering of bachelor disciples had been an early

form of cruising, with the characteristic indifference to class and
status. In his view, Judas was the jealous lover

who gave his boyfriend

away to the police: ‘We may also remember that Christ was a Jew,
and that his apostles were of an Oriental race inclined to homosexual
passions.’ In Une Saison en Enfer, Rimbaud recast his adventure with
Verlaine as a tale of the ‘Foolish Virgin’ and the ‘Holy Bridegroom’

- the charlatan Messiah and his weak disciple erotically entangled
in a

*

London bedsit. In De profundis, Oscar Wilde turned Jesus into

Roman copy of a 4th-centuiy bc Greek statue of an athlete scraping his arm with

a strigil, in the Vatican Museum.

[248]

Gentle Jesus
an 1890s aesthete with a criminal record: ‘the scarlet figure of
History’,

who exposed himself ‘to all experience’; ‘the dream of a

Virgilian poet’; ‘Socrates [might have] reasoned with him and Plato

understood him.’ Jesus and John appeared with growing frequency in
lists

of male lovers. Emmanuel Signoret’s Le Livre de Vamitie (1891)

placed Jesus and John - ‘hair blowing in the breeze of sensual pleasure’

- in the unlikely company of Verlaine and his young lover, Lucien
Letinois.

In an age when most public heroes owed their prestige to acts of
aggression, gentle Jesus remained a revolutionary presence. Jesus and

the twelve apostles were a model homosocial community, a saintly

equivalent of Robin Hood and his Merry Men. For those who lived

company of a
few like-minded friends, the select group of devoted young men was

in fear of persecution, in enforced chastity or in the

an inspiring example:

The great framer of the world meant to create in Urnings a noble
priesthood, a race of Samaritans, a severely pure order of men, in order
to offer a strong counterpoise to the immoral tendencies of the human
race. (Otto de Joux, Die Enterbten des Liebesgliickes, 1893)

The language of the Gospels was used to express the suffering or
happiness of a homosexual life - the abandonment by God or the
revelation of the love ‘which passeth knowledge’.

The moment or

process of coming out was a religious experience:
I was overcome with real despair. I cried with shame,

when the stranger

me in amazement: ‘Why are you behaving like that?
Hundreds of people do this!’ Never in my life - may God forgive me!
turned to

- have I heard such a blessed word. I felt as though I was waking to a

new life and that I had been born again! (Testimony of ‘an upper-class
society man’ published by J. L. Casper in 1863)

These were not parasitic exploitations of a supposedly fixed set of
symbols. They were sincere attempts to escape from loneliness and
despair, to share in the love that had been promised to all and reserved

for a few.

Most yearnings for a church and a community found no immediate
echo. They implied a religion that was mystical and personal rather

[249]

Strangers
than a public expression of shared beliefs. The huge angelic society
of heaven was an implausible dream, or even a nightmare.

Many

years later, Quentin Crisp could imagine nothing better than eternal

anonymity:

By heterosexuals the life after death is imagined as a world of light,
where there is no parting. If there is a heaven for homosexuals, which
doesn’t seem very likely, it will be very poorly lit and full of people

they can feel pretty confident they will never have to meet again.
*

By the end of the 19th century, the idea of Christian homosexuality was sufficiently well established to be used as a reason to reject

Christianity. Many ideological attacks were based on an assumption

that Jesus

was effeminate and the Church a haven for inverts.

It

was partly to combat this association of Christian tenderness with
effeminacy that Charles Kingsley developed the idea of ‘muscular
Christianity’

and that Thomas Hughes (of Tom Brownes Schooldays)

wrote The Manliness of Christ (1879 and 1894). Zola and other anticlerical ideologues wrote of the ‘devirilizing’ effect of Jesus. Christian

continence was widely held to be a cause of sexual perversion in men

and women. According to Vasili Rosanov, in People of the Moonlight
(1911), the ‘wondrousness’ of Christianity was simply the ‘wonder’

of ‘inversion’.

‘All

similes, promises,

New-Testament instructions,

parables, images,

and rules can be reduced to one: “Do not be

attracted to women”.’

The figure of the androgyne in art and literature also underwent
a

change. Androgynes had once been symbols of unity and hope,

now they were nightmares of genital angst. Balzac’s hermaphroditic
angel on skis, Seraphita- Seraphims (1835), is a model of loving omniscience. The Mephistophela of Camlle Mendes (in an internationally

best-selling novel of 1890) is a vampirical, cigarette-smoking trans-

who thinks that Jesus actively promoted lesbian sex. The
angels of William Blake had embodied a religious idea. The swooning

vestite

hermaphrodites of Burne-Jones and Gustave Moreau were eerily
passive and

consumed by an unknown disease. A similar degenera-

tion occurred in homosexual interpretations of the Gospels. Aleister

Gentle Jesus
Crowley’s childish ode to sodomy in White Stains (1898) turned Luke

‘Go into the highways and hedges and
(Crowley’s emphasis). A French journalist

14:23 into a lewd innuendo:

M

compel them to come
described Alfred Douglas as ‘a gentleman who practises in his own
fashion the injunction, “Suffer little children to come unto me.”

’

The theme was quickly taken up by 20th-century homophobia. If
Gerard Manley Hopkins had preached his sermon thirty years later,
his

matinee idol Christ might have caused some discomfort in the

pews. Homoerotic depictions of Jesus in the 20th century would often

meet with organized opposition. This was the now familiar dilemma:
social acceptance was impossible without recognition, but public
recognition also brought public rejection.

For most of the 19th century, there had been a nervous, negative
kind of freedom. Delville’s Platonic Jesus, which visitors to the Musee

d’Orsay now instantly recognize as a gay icon, passed without public
protest, as did Simeon Solomon’s homoerotic threesome. The Sleepers

and the One That Watcheth (1870). This vertical bed scene on a starry

background was not explicitly Biblical, but the title clearly alluded to
the

Garden of Gethsemane. Few enough bridges had been built

between gay culture and the general public that Solomon’s drawings
could, without incurring instant opprobrium, circulate

among the

homosexual cognoscenti. (His drawing of Love Talking to Boys hung

on the wall of Oscar Wilde’s rooms at Magdalen.)
This uneasy state of affairs was a prelude to open combat. The
crucified Christ, remarkable for its expressive loin-cloth, that Ralph

Adams Cram supplied for All Saints’ Episcopal Church in Boston,
had been created under the homoerotic influence of 1890s aestheticism.

When it was installed in 1911, ‘it aroused enough ire to be

threatened with replacement’. Duncan Grant’s wall painting of The

Good Shepherd

(c.

1958), based

on

a

Hermes

in the

Catacombs,

adorned the Russell Chantry in Lincoln Cathedral until the 1960s,

when the chapel was closed to the public and used as a store-room.
Grant’s noble, sensual Jesus was covered up by piles of ecclesiastical
rubbish. (The mural is now on public display.)
It is typical

of 19th-century gay traditions that the notion of a

homosexual or sympathetic Jesus spread in such an obscure, rhizomatous fashion. Ideas arose independently and spontaneously, with few

[251]

Strangers
obvious signs of cross-fertilization. Yet this scattered minority gave

new life to traditions that explicitly rejected it. Far from perverting
holy scripture, most homosexual readings revealed inherent ambi-

and perhaps - to judge by the neurotic intensity of later

guities

reactions - the latent homosexuality of the established Church.

Most homosexual men and women who looked for warmth in the
Church were not anticipating social liberation. They lived, like
the early Christians, in a dark world of small spaces in which the only

constant light came from a place beyond the grave. When Gerard

Manley Hopkins administered First Communion to the blooming
bugler boy at Cowley barracks [.

.

.]

so I in a sort deserve to

And do serve God to serve to
Just such slips of soldiery Christ’s royal ration -

or when Verlaine pictured his ecstatic conversion as rough treatment
at the hands of a Rimbaldian God, their religious passion was all the

stronger for their experience of human love. And when Emily Dick-

inson longed for her beloved Sue Gilbert on Sunday mornings, her

thoughts might have been sacrilegious in a strict sense, but there was

probably no more fervent soul in the congregation.

When [the pastor] said ‘Our Heavenly Father’, I said ‘Oh Darling
Sue’, when he read the 100th Psalm, I kept saying your precious letter
all

over to myself, and Susie, when they sang - it would have made

you laugh to hear one little voice, piping to the departed. I made up
words and kept singing how I loved you, and you had gone, while all
the rest of the choir were singing Hallelujahs. I presume nobody heard

me, because I sang so small, but it was a kind of a comfort to think
I

might put them out, singing of you. [.

.

.]

I

think of love, and you,

and my heart grows full and warm, and my breath stands still. The
sun does’nt shine at all, but I can feel a sunshine stealing into my soul

and making it all summer, and every thorn, a rose.
[.

.

.]

You won’t cry any more, will you, Susie, for my father will be

your father, and my home will be your home, and where you go, I will
go, and we will lie side by side in the kirkyard.

10

Heroes of Modern Life

Be wary of the probable: start by believing the incredible.
Emile Gaboriau, Monsieur Lecoq (1869), chapter 8

When you have eliminated all which is impossible, then
whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
Arthur Conan Doyle, ‘The Adventure of the Blanched Soldier’,

The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes (1927)

T

he lost heritage of gay men and women was mislaid, not
destroyed. Sexuality was never so obvious or so feared that it led

to the suppression of an entire culture. Different standards are

still

applied to the lives and works of gay men and women, and a morali-

zing tone is still sometimes allowed when the subject is homosexuality,

but the works of 19th-century gay writers are easy to obtain and
widely read - even those that would otherwise have been forgotten.

The influence of gay men and women on European and American
society was constant and profound, and there is no lack of evidence
to prove it. But identifying specific influences - on literature and the
arts,

fashion, religion, law, medicine and psychiatry - might actually

diminish their role by suggesting that gay experience can easily be
separated from the rest of human life.

This final chapter, which forms a coda rather than a conclusion, is

[253]

Strangers
an attempt to detect, in a particular example, a more general influence.

Much of this book has been devoted to extricating individuals from
the mass. This

is

not

a last-minute

attempt to identify essential,

common characteristics or to claim that gay men and women were
fundamentally different from everyone

else.

Notions of profound

superiority are just as suspect as notions of profound depravity. But

the circumstances in which they lived were different and placed them
in a special position.

The subject has been touched on at various points: Victorian
society, like the ‘primitive’ cultures discovered by its missionaries and

explorers, assigned a shamanic role to sexual strangers.

The fasci-

nation with homosexuality - vulgarly expressed as prurient interest
in bedroom behaviour - was the mark of an unconscious or grudging

perception that gay men and women had special knowledge, that they

formed a kind of existential avant-garde and were somehow more at

home in the modern world than the protected majority. In a shy and
silent part of the Victorian mind, ‘Uranians’ were the model citizens

of a rapidly changing world.

This shamanic role is seen most clearly in the emergence of the
private detective as a modern hero - hence the following few pages

of literary analysis. But the significance of this figure and its amazing
popularity go far beyond literary history^. In this domain at least, a

steady bridge existed between the fantasy world of popular perceptions and the real experience of gay men and women.

The end of this epilogue will have the not entirely incidental
advantage of returning this history to its starting point - the criminal
justice system - in more cheerful and intelligent circumstances.

It

is

generally agreed that the myth of the private eye was

invented by Edgar Allan Poe. The eccentric amateur sleuth, Auguste

Dupin, was introduced in 1841 in The Murders in the Rue Morgue.

He reappeared in The Mystery of Marie Roget (1842) and The Purloined
Letter (1845). Although he then disappeared for ever, his footprints

can be found in almost every detective tale that followed.

According to the narrator of Marie Roget., the gory mishap in the
Rue Morgue was just a pretext. The idea was not to illustrate

Heroes of Modern Life
the homicidal propensities of the Bornese orang-utan but ‘to depict

some very remarkable features in the mental character of my friend,
the Chevalier C. Auguste Dupin’. ‘This depicting of character consti-

tuted my design; and this design was thoroughly fulfilled in the wild
train of circumstances brought to instance Dupin’s idiosyncrasy.’

The character of the world’s first literary detective, in other words,
is

a puzzle cloaked in a mystery.

Magazine, Poe,

When the tale appeared in Graham^s

who edited the magazine, was running a cipher

competition. Readers were invited to send in coded messages, which
Poe then solved - all except one, which turned out to be a meaningless

jumble of letters. His

own cipher remained unsolved, despite the

enticement of a year’s subscription to the magazine.

Though no one seems to have noticed. The Murders in the Rue
Morgue was another test of the readers’ cryptic skills. The first part
of the tale is a detailed exposition of Dupin’s analytical methods, but
it

was also an invitation to apply the methods to the tale itself, to

distinguish the large and irrelevant

from the small and significant:

‘The necessary knowledge’, says Dupin, ‘is that of what to observe.’

What then do we know about the enigmatic Dupin? Two kinds
of information are offered: explicit and encrypted. The explicit
information provides the clues and the encrypted information the
proof.
First, the clues: Dupin belongs to an illustrious, aristocratic family,

has written poetry, and admires Epicurus.

He has a friend, known

only as D., who is a renowned poet and a dandy, and whose servants
are ‘chiefly Neapolitans’. ‘By a variety of untoward [and unspecified]
events’,

Dupin has been reduced to poverty. He now goes out only

at night and, despite having satisfied his creditors, is curiously vigilant:

‘Observation has become with me, of late, a species of necessity.’

One evening, the narrator meets Dupin in ‘an obscure library’ and
experiences something like love at first sight:
I felt

my soul enkindled within me by the wild fervor, and the vivid

freshness of his imagination. Seeking in Paris the objects I then sought,
I felt that the

price;

and

society of such a man would be to me a treasure beyond

this feeling I frankly

confided to him.

It

was

at

length

arranged that we should live together during my stay in the city.

U55]

Strangers

The two friends make their home in ‘a time-eaten and grotesque
mansion’ in the Faubourg St Germain. Their whereabouts are to

remain a secret:

Had the routine of our life at this place been known to the world,
we should have been regarded as madmen - although, perhaps, as

madmen of a harmless nature.
It was a freak of fancy in

[.

.

.]

my friend (for what else shall I call it?) to

be enamored of the night for her own sake; and into this bizarrerie,
as into all his others, I quietly fell; giving myself up to his wild whims

with a perfect abandon.

Dupin and his enthralled disciple spend their days behind closed
shutters in the scent-laden gloom of their hideaway. Perfumed tapers
burn in the unnatural darkness. At night, they prowl the streets, arm
in arm, ‘seeking,
city,

amid the wild lights and shadows of the populous

that infinity of mental excitement which quiet observation can

afford’.

One night, in a dirty street near the Palais Royal (the hub of
Parisian prostitution), Dupin reveals his ‘intimate knowledge’ of the
narrator’s ‘bosom’:

He boasted to me, with a low, chuckling laugh, that most men, in
respect to himself, wore windows in their bosoms, and was wont to

follow up such assertions by direct and very startling proofs of his
intimate knowledge of my own. His

manner at these moments was

frigid and abstract; his eyes were vacant in expression; while his voice,

usually a rich tenor, rose into a treble which

would have sounded

petulant but for the deliberateness and entire distincmess of the enunciation. Observing him in these moods, I often dwelt meditatively upon

the old philosophy of the Bi-Part Soul, and amused myself with the

fancy of a double Dupin - the creative and the resolvent.

Having now depicted his friend as a modern-day androgyne - tenor
and treble, creator and analyst - the narrator feels the need to allay
suspicions. In fact, he does the opposite:

Let it not be supposed that I am detailing any mystery, or penning

any romance. What I have described in the Frenchman was merely
the result of an excited, or perhaps of a diseased, intelligence.

[256]

Heroes oe Modern Life
There is, of course, nothing essentially odd about the passionate,
and nocturnal friendship of two strange men in a crimeridden city, even if one of them is a dandy with a ‘diseased’ mind and
the other, later in the tale, finds a muscle-bound sailor (the owner
secretive

of the orang-utan) ‘not altogether unprepossessing’.

form a human shape which few
would
expect to find at such an early date. Poe’s
cultural detectives
However, the

details gradually

description of two

men burning perfumed tapers and keeping the

shutters closed might not sound suspicious today, but it certainly did
in 1841. Even half a century later, an identical domestic arrangement sent a little shiver of excitement through a London jury. Sir
Edward Carson was cross-examining Oscar Wilde about his visits to

the procurer, Alfred Taylor:
Carson: It would not be true, then, to say that he always kept a double
set of curtains drawn across the windows and day and night

lighted the room with candles or gas?
Wilde:

Carson:

Oh, I should think quite untrue.
.

[.

.]

Were they always highly perfumed, these rooms in

College Street?
Wilde:

[.

.

.]

He was in the habit of burning perfume, as I am in my

rooms.
Carson:

As you are in your rooms?

Wilde:

As I am in mine - a very charming habit it is.

The jurymen, comments Montgomery Hyde, ‘now began to show
by the shocked looks on their faces what they thought of this establishment, so different from their own respectable habitations’. It was
this peculiar
trial:

arrangement that first excited the jury in the second

‘More than anything else perhaps they were influenced by the

rooms in Little College Street, with their
heavily draped windows, candles burning on through the day, and the
description of Taylor’s

langorous atmosphere heavy with perfume.’

The criminal nuances of Poe’s menage help to thicken the foggy
atmosphere, but they also reflect a precise intention. A handful of
m)Miological allusions are scattered through the text, from the epi-

graph to the final paragraph. When these allusions are assembled, a
pattern emerges:

[257]

Strangers
- The epigraph, from Sir Thomas Browne’s Um Burial (via Suetonius’s life of Tiberius), refers to the period

when Achilles was dressed

‘What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles
assumed when he hid himself among women, although puzzling
questions, are not beyond all conjecture.’
as a girl:

- By closing the shutters in the daytime, Dupin and the narrator are
said to ‘counterfeit [the] presence’ of the goddess of night.

- The two

friends have ‘often conversed’ about a line of Latin:

‘Perdidit antiquum litera prima sonum^

(‘The first letter has lost its

former sound’). This refers to the belief that Orion was ‘formerly
written Urion’. ‘From certain pungencies connected with this
explanation’, says Dupin,

‘I

was aware that you could not have

forgotten it.’ The nature of these ‘pungencies’ is revealed in the

source of the quotation: Ovid’s Fasti. Hyrieus, the founder of Hyria,

was childless. He sought the help of the gods and was advised to

on the hide of a sacrificed bull and then bury it. Nine
months later, a boy rose from the earth and was named Orion or
Urion (from ouqov, urine).

urinate

- Dupin compares his methods to the astronomer’s trick of using
peripheral vision: a sidelong glance at a star allows its light to fall

on the more sensitive part of the retina, whereas, ‘by a scrutiny
too sustained, too concentrated, or too direct’,

‘it

is

possible to

make even Venus herself vanish from the firmament’.
- The tale ends with Dupin ’s withering assessment of the Prefect of
Police: ‘In his wisdom is no stamen. It is all head and no body, like

the pictures of the Goddess Laverna.’

The Prefect is compared

to the goddess of thieves and described as a unisexual organism, a

flower without a pollen-bearing organ.
It

now becomes clear that a hidden thread runs through the tale:

the impersonation or elimination of the female or, in the Prefect’s
case, the male (the transvestite Achilles, the goddess of night ‘counterfeited’

by two men, the exclusively male procreation of Orion, the

obliteration of Venus, and the stamenless Prefect-Laverna).

To use

Dupin’s analogy, these classical allusions are the letters that form the
largest word on the map - a word which, precisely because it stretches

‘from one end of the chart to the other’, escapes detection.

[258]

Heroes of Modern Life

The murder story can now be seen as a symbolic reflection of the
whole. Just as the ‘man’ who commits the murders is not a man,
the man who solves them is not a man either in the normal sense of the
word. Two ‘wild’ things are alive in the city (the adjective is applied
twice to

Dupin and twice to the ape): one of them has very large

hands, tawny hair and the strength of a lunatic; the other is a nocturnal
creature with heightened senses and unusual mating habits.

The Murders in the Rue Morgue turns out to be even more remarkable than it first appears. The world’s first literary detective is also

one of the first modern homosexual heroes. The painted fops of 18thcentury satire and the creeping perverts of the penny dreadful are only
distant cousins of Dupin. His closest living relative is the supernatural

androgyne of Gothic fiction, but the androgyne now has an urban
lifestyle, tastes in interior decoration and a like-minded friend. Unlike

most later homosexual characters, he enjoys a passionate and stable
friendship, uncontaminated by self-loathing or despair. He appears to

be that rarest of birds in 1 9th-centuiy literature: a happy homosexual.

The question then arises: where did he come from? We know
Poe met an orang-utan in Philadelphia in 1839, and it is not
unreasonable to suppose that he also met a homosexual. Until now,
that

the earliest known references to homosexuality in the urban United
States (since Poe’s fantasy Paris seems to be a transposition of

New

York) were sleazy exposes in the 1830s and 1840s on homosexual

and a transvestite robber known as
‘Man Monster’. Melville’s Redburn (1849)

prostitution, foreign sodomites

‘Beefsteak Pete’ or the

refers to effeminate hookers ‘with small feet like a doll’s, and a small,

glossy head like a seal’s’, ‘standing in sentimental attitudes in front of

Palmo’s in Broadway’. In the same year. City Crimes^ or Life in New
York and Boston by ‘Greenhorn’ described the boy prostitutes who as all

New Yorkers apparently knew - sold themselves in the vicinity

of Central Park to ‘genteel foreign vagabonds’.

Dupin and his friend are a rare reminder that, despite the distorting
weight of evidence, 19th-century homosexuality is not reducible to
public prostitution any more than heterosexuality can be attributed
to brothels.

This twilight world also had its domestic, settled side.

The prowling ‘perverts’ of the popular press were also hearth-rug
homosexuals.

[259]

Strangers
Poe’s male menage is neither a den of vice nor a cowering, apologetic anomaly. Far from corrupting society, Dupin rids it of a vicious
threat. His mind may be ‘diseased’, but it would be hard to imagine

a more useful citizen. In the factual writings of lawyers, doctors and
journalists, the

homosexual was a fictitious monster. In the dream

world of literature, he was a real person and, more to the point, an

improvement on the norm.
If Dupin and his friend had lived a century later, they might
have been the subject of a police investigation or a medical inquiry.
Normality would have been restored, but at what cost? The forces of
order would have been left to their inadequate devices, and the city
would still be terrorized by a hyperactive ape.
*

An apparently straightforward case of influence can reveal a more
profound connection. It is significant, for instance, that ‘the introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street’ inherited not only Dupin’s
methods but also, according to Dr Watson, his ‘dual nature’.*

The following observations are not a sly attempt to ensnare the
great detective in the elastic web of gay revisionism. Everyone already

knows, instinctively, that Holmes is homosexual. Screen adaptations
are a good test. The least convincing are always those that provide

him with a girlfriend. The most convincing, like Billy Wilder’s The
Private Life of Sherlock Holmes (1970) -

promoted as ‘a love story

between two men’ - are those that exaggerate his camp behaviour.

Without the tense, suppressed passion that binds him to his biographer, Holmes is just a man with an interesting hobby.

Conan Doyle himself was quietly ambivalent on the subject of
homosexuality. In one of the medical tales collected in Round the Red

Lamp (1894), an alienist called Charley Manson, ‘author of the brilliant monograph. Obscure Lesions in the Unmarried\ regrets that, while

‘some of the richest human materials that a man could study’ can be

*

Emile Gaboriau’s ‘almost beardless, very pale’ young bachelor detective, Lecoq,

created in 1863, twenty-four years before Holmes,

is

another close

relative.

A

‘naturally moral and honest young man, [he] spent much of his time in perpetrating

- in fancy - the most abominable crimes’.

^

Heroes of Modern Life
found in the field of medicine, these subjects are out-of-bounds to
the novelist: for example, ‘the singular phenomena of waxing and of

waning manhood’ and ‘those actions which have cut short many an
honoured career and sent a man to prison when he should have been
hurried to a consulting-room’. This was
disgraced Oscar Wilde:

Dr Doyle’s view of the

thought at the time, and

‘I

still

think

[in

1924] that the monstrous development which ruined him was pathological,

and that a hospital rather than a police court was the place

for its consideration.’ Or a writer’s study. Doyle had once asked Roger

Casement to provide him with information on sexual perversion
among the natives of the Peruvian Amazon, and he supported him
publicly even after the ‘Black Diaries’ had revealed Casement’s own
enthusiastic contribution to homosexual perversion in South America.

Holmes himself bears a striking resemblance to Oscar Wilde.
Doyle first met Wilde at the Langham Hotel in August 1889, at a
dinner given by the publisher J. M. Stoddart. The meeting led to the
publication in Lippincotfs Magazine of The Picture of Dorian Gray^ ‘a

book which is surely upon a high moral plane’, according to Doyle,
and The Sign of Four ‘in which Holmes made his second appearance’.
Thirty-five years later, Doyle still remembered that ‘golden
evening’. Wilde’s conversation had left ‘an indelible impression’ - his
‘curious precision of statement’, the ‘delicate flavour of humour’.

‘He towered above us

Doyle had in effect been dining with

all.’

Sherlock Holmes. The two were easily confused. In 1923, during his
ectoplasmic phase, Doyle received a message from beyond the grave

and defied ‘any man of real critical instinct to read that script and

doubt that it emanates from Wilde’: ‘Being dead is the most boring
experience in

life,

that

is

if

one excepts being married or dining

with a school-master!’ If he had thought to insert the words,

‘My

dear Watson’, it would have been obvious to him that the message

had emanated, not from Wilde, but from the other leading wit and
aesthete of the Decadent Nineties.

Sherlock Holmes, like Oscar Wilde, was one of the popular faces
of Victorian aestheticism.

The man on the Baker Street omnibus

could peer through the fictitious windows of 221b and feel at home
in the world of ‘superior’ minds. Like a true Decadent, Holmes enjoys

‘introspective’ German music and listens to it with ‘languid, dreamy

[261]

Strangers
eyes’. ‘Art for art’s sake’ is one of his mottoes - applied, not to poetry,

but to the incongruously useful art of criminal detection. He possesses
the prerequisites of any serious aesthete: ‘extraordinary delicacy of
touch’, a ‘catlike love of personal cleanliness’, and artistic

French

blood. (His grandmother was the sister of the painter, Horace Vernet.)

As Holmes tells Watson in ‘The Greek Interpreter’ (1893), ‘Art in
the blood

is

liable

to take the strangest forms.’

Proof of this

is

found in Sherlock’s older brother, Mycroft - a brilliant and eccentric

who spends his evenings at a club for unsociable men,

bachelor

observing the ‘magnificent types’ that tread its carpet: ‘The Diogenes
Club’, explains Holmes, ‘is the queerest club in London, and Mycroft,

one of the queerest men.’*

As

a lover

of the

artificial

to

whom country air is poison and

London fog a tonic. Holmes abhors ‘Nature’ with a Baudelairian
passion,

though he is capable of falling into a long reverie whilst

contemplating ‘the drooping stalk of a moss-rose’: ‘What a lovely
thing a rose is!’ exclaims the great detective, astonishing the ever-

observant Dr Watson: ‘It was a new phase of his character to me, for
I had never before seen

him show any keen interest in natural objects.’

‘Natural objects’, of course, include women. ‘As a lover’, observes

Watson, ‘he would have placed himself in a false position.’ The only
woman he admires is Irene Adler, who dresses as a man. ‘Male
costume is nothing new to me’, she tells her cerebral admirer.
Otherwise, the ‘softer human emotions’ in Holmes are reserved
entirely for Watson. In the first story,

A Study in Scarlet (1887), when

Watson praises him for making criminal detection an exact science.
Holmes ‘flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way
in

which

I

uttered them.

I

had already observed that he was

sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as

her beauty.’ This delicate friendship

is

as

any girl could be of

the subject of the second

Holmes story. The Sign of Four (1890). The interest lies not in the
feeble mystery but in the

*

enigma of the Holmesian brain. Early in

In 1894, ‘queer’ had already acquired its modern sense. Wilde’s persecutor, the

Marquis of Queensberry, referred that year to ‘the Snob Queers like Roseberry’ [sic].
The words ‘earnest’ and ‘languid’, applied below to Holmes, also had homosexual
connotations.

[262]

Heroes of Modern Life
the investigation,

Dr Watson inconsiderately falls in love with the

distressed client:

‘What a very attractive woman!’ I exclaimed, turning to my companion.

He had lit his pipe again and was leaning back with drooping eyelids.
‘Is

she?’ he said languidly; ‘I did not observe.’

‘You really are an automaton - a calculating machine’, I cried. ‘There
is

something positively inhuman in you at times.’

He smiled gently.

The human calculating machine tries to woo Watson away from
his beloved Mary. Summoning up a meal of grouse and oysters, he
chides his friend, ‘You have never yet recognized

my merits as a

housekeeper.’ He even tries to impress him with his bedside manner:

‘Look here, Watson; you look regularly done. Lie down there on
the sofa and see if I can put you to sleep.’

He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out
he began to play some low, dreamy, melodious

air

- his own, no

doubt, for he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vague

remembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face and the rise and fall
of his bow. Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon a soft
sea of sound until I found myself in dreamland, with the sweet face of

Mary Morstan looking down upon me.
His wifely virtues spurned. Holmes loses his friend to marriage
with ‘a most dismal groan’.
Happily, Mrs Watson never materializes and has the grace to be

dead by 1904. ‘Old times’ return, with many moments of fervent
intimacy: Watson’s hands are clutched, his knees patted, and his ears

brushed by Holmes’s whispering lips. When the trail leads out of

London, they sleep in ‘double-bedded’ rooms. In the following scene,

Watson has been shot and feels a searing pain in his thigh. The
19th-century man of forensic investigation meets the 19th-century

man of medicine in a loving embrace:

My friend’s wiry arms were round me, and he was leading me to a chair.
‘You’re not hurt,

Watson? For God’s sake, say that you are not

hurt!’

[263]

Strangers
It was

worth a wound - it was worth many wounds - to know the

depth of loyalty and love which lay behind that cold mask. The clear,
hard eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the firm lips were shaking.

For the one and only time I caught a glimpse of a great heart as well
as of a great brain. All my* years of humble but single-minded service

culminated in that moment of revelation.

A writer who could tease his readers with untold tales like that of
the Giant Rat of Sumatra (Tor which the world is not yet prepared’),

was certainly capable of toying with the subscribers of The Strand

Magazine and their amazing infatuation with Holmes. Between 1886
and 1927, the great detective becomes increasingly patriotic, but also
increasingly camp. T trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale

my infinite variety’, he prompts his sidekick. On separate occasions,
he greets Inspector Gregson and a Tremendously
sinister’

virile

and yet

criminal with the Shakespearean refrain, ‘Journeys end in

lovers’ meeting’.

In 1908, Baden-Powell held up this camping aesthete as a role
model in his Scouting for Boys. The title has since acquired an accidental ambiguity which suits Holmes quite well. He nurtures young
detectives, trains a

gang of little urchins, and, in The Hound of the

Baskervilles (1901), adopts a fourteen-year-old telegraph
valet,

boy as his

which was hardly an innocent act after the Cleveland Street

scandal

(p. 26).

also help to

‘fill

Sherlock’s

little

helpers not only run errands, they

up the gap of loneliness and isolation which sur-

rounded the saturnine figure of the great detective’.
Holmes’s sexuality, like Dupin’s, is not just an exotic embellishment
to match the Persian slippers, the Stradivarius violin and the hypo-

dermic needles: it is an essential part of his character, which might
explain why Doyle ‘recognized’ Sherlock Holmes in the American
actor, William Gillette - a man described as ‘very handsome’, ‘eccentric’

and ‘no longer interested in women’. Like Dupin, Holmes has a

distinctly homosexual lifestyle.

He sits with his friend in the North-

umberland Avenue Turkish baths, for which ‘both Holmes and I had
a weakness’. A simple Venn diagram of his readings would show

them to have homosexuality as their common denominator: Horace,
Catullus, Hafiz and Thoreau; anthropology, medicine, scandal sheets

[264]

Heroes of Modern Life
and police records. Instead of asserting his manliness in ‘amateur
sport, which is the best and soundest thing in England’, he frequents

Chinese opium dens, consorts with ‘rough-looking men’, and has ‘at
least five small refuges in different parts of London, in which he was

able to change his personality’.

He stalks his prey, at various times,

as a groom, a sailor, a nonconformist clergyman,
workman, a French ouvrier and an old woman:

a rakish

young

‘You’ve seen me as an old woman, Watson. I was never more convincing.

[Count Sylvius] actually picked up my parasol for me once. “By

your leave, madame”, said he - half-Italian, you know, and with the
Southern graces of manner when in the mood, but a devil incarnate
in the other mood. Life is full of whimsical happenings, Watson.’

This hazardous underworld is Holmes’s natural habitat. He first
appeared

two

months

after

the

Labouchere

Amendment. He

next appeared in February 1890, at the height of the Cleveland
Street scandal.

He thrives in the world of impending disgrace that

the Baker Street files so amply record:

There are the dispatch-cases filled with documents, a perfect quarry
for the student, not only of crime, but of the social and official scandals

of the late Victorian era. Concerning these latter, I may say that the
writers of agonized letters, who beg that the honour of their families or

the reputation of famous forebears may not be touched, have nothing
to fear.

Watson never tries to ‘force a confidence’, though, as a reader of
‘modern French psychologists’ and the British Medical Journal^ he
clearly has suspicions.

Why, for instance, does Holmes speak ‘with

such intensity of feeling’ of the blackmailer, Milverton, who ‘purrs’

and has a hairless face? Why does he suddenly beg Watson to run

away with him to the Continent after almost losing his life in Vere
Street - a name notorious in the annals of homosexual scandal? And
what are we to make of his evil pursuer, Moriarty? What were those

him to resign his Chair at a provincial
And to what is Holmes referring when he says that

‘dark rumours’ that forced
university?

Moriarty suffers from ‘hereditary tendencies of the most diabolical
kind’?

[265]

Strangers
These too, no doubt, were tales ‘for which the world was not yet
prepared’.
*

The extraordinary success

of Dupin and Holmes, both as

crime-solvers and as fictional characters,

is

directly related to their

Corroboration can be found in the long line of sexually
ambiguous sleuths that followed in their velvety footsteps: E. W.
sexuality.

Hornung’s Raffles and his adoring ex-fag and biographer. Bunny, who
finds him ‘irresistible’ and feels ‘an almost staggering sense of safety’
in his ‘masterful’ presence (from 1899);

Maurice Leblanc’s Arsene

Lupin, ‘gentleman burglar’, and his young accomplice, Gilbert (from
1907); Agatha Christie’s Hercule Poirot (from 1920), the little dandy

with a ‘cherub-like face’ whose friends include dustmen and dukes,

and who has a housekeeper’s eye for detail: he notices stray threads,
fusses about the positioning of teacups, uses cosmetics, and criticizes
his companion. Captain Hastings, for being interested only in women:

‘Ah, mon ami^ one can have romance without golden-haired girls of

matchless beauty.’

Dorothy L. Sayers’ Lord Peter Wimsey (from 1933) is theoretically
heterosexual but matches the typical medical profile of an ‘invert’:
‘a

colourless shrimp of a child’, born of ‘exhausted stock’. ‘All nerves

and nose’, he grew up with a passion for books and music, was known
to his fellow Etonians as ‘Elimsy’ and is still a bachelor at the age of
forty- five.

Many other detectives - Miss Marple, Eather Brown, Ellery Queen
- lead similarly pregnant,

celibate lives. S. S.

Van Dine’s languid

aristocrat detective, Philo Vance (from 1926) - ‘New York’s leading

flaneur and art connoisseur’ - lives with an English butler and eats

with his inseparable friend the author. Rex Stout’s happily unmarried,
hippo-sized sleuth, Nero Wolfe (from 1934), lives with his ‘futile and
sterile’

orchids and his young friend Archie Goodwin in an all-male

household.

The persistent ambivalence of the literary sleuth can hardly be
attributed to conscious imitation, since neither Dupin nor Holmes

was recognized as homosexual, except by casual humorists. Balzac,
significantly, created a homosexual detective at almost the same time

[266]

^

Heroes of Modern Life
as Poe: Vautrin, the convict who

becomes Head of the Surete and

who is both a danger to society and ‘a great doctor of the soul’.
Neither writer knew of the other’s detective. They were acting,
independently, on the same insight. Both Poe and Balzac saw in
the city-dwelling homosexual the outline of a much older type: the

berdache or shaman, the sexually ambiguous warlock (or sherlock?)

who knows how to live on the night-side of life and to decipher its
secrets.

The

anthropological

association

of clairvoyance

with

homo-

sexuality may correspond in part to certain practical characteristics of

gay life. The fact that detective fiction represents a disproportionately

amount of modern gay fiction does suggest a special affinity
with these ambiguous heroes who owe their strange power to secrets.
In his Intermediate Types Among Primitive Folk (1911), Edward
large

Carpenter suggested that the ‘Uranian’, like the shaman, possesses
unusual powers of observation. He or she may even represent a more

advanced stage of evolution: ‘This interaction in fact, between the
masculine and the feminine, this mutual illumination of logic and
intuition, this

combination of action and meditation [.

.

.]

may give

the mind a new quality, and a new power of perception.’ Something
similar had been observed more than 2,000 years before by Herodotus
in the men-women of the Scythians.
It is tempting to associate the

modern survival of transvestite ‘twin-

spirits’ in the tribes of North and Central America with the prevalence

of these homoerotic detective partnerships in American literature.
Passionate male friendships associated with uncanny deductive powers

and a desire for social justice are a common theme, from the ‘LeatherStocking Tales’ of Fenimore Cooper to the masked Lone Ranger and
his uncannily perceptive sidekick Tonto, who, for the first two years

of his existence, rode behind his partner on the same horse, and, of
course, the ‘dynamic duo’. Batman and Robin, who have a cosy home
life as

Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson but who also cruise the slimy

streets

of Gotham City, nervously disguised and dressed in tights.

Noting the large number of homosexual Batman devotees

at the

Quaker Emergency Service Readjustment Center in New York City,
Fredric Wertham described the caped crusaders’ friendship in 1955

[267]

Strangers
as the typical pederastic relationship, ‘a

wish dream of two homo-

sexuals living together’.

This is not just a matter of archetypes and the collective unconscious.

For the berdaches of the modern world, a double life on the

fringes of respectable society

was simply an everyday reality. The

New York transvestite, Earl Lind, described his nocturnal activities
in terms very similar to those used by Poe’s narrator:

Because of my innate appetencies and avocation of female-impersonator, I was fated to be a Nature-appointed amateur detective. I enjoyed

entree to the hearts of both male and female denizens of the Under-

world, my stamping-ground when I surrendered my bisexual body to
the feminine side of my dual psyche.

The wearing of masks, the street-wise reading of signs, the ability
to operate in different milieux: these were the qualifications of the

urban homosexual and the private detective. Sexual singularity was a
key to the world of crime and the secret configurations of the city,
as Sherlock Holmes discreetly implied in the ‘magnum opus’ to which

he devotes his later years: Practical Handbook of Bee Culture^ with Some
Observations upon the Segregation of the Queen - ‘behold the fruit of

pensive nights and laborious days when I watched the little working

gangs

as

once

I

watched the criminal world of London’. By the

same token, J. Edgar Hoover’s clandestine transvestite activities were
perhaps not unrelated to his grotesque efficiency as director of the
FBI. As he wrote in 1947, with personal, inside knowledge, ‘depraved

human beings, more savage than beasts, are permitted to rove America
almost at will’.

The astounding commercial success of the homosexual detective
represents a kind of recuperation of the scapegoat by an apparently

homophobic

society. Just

as

the American Indian berdache was

allowed to break taboos - to wear women’s clothes and even to be

sodomized in public ceremonies - the homosexual sleuth was a special
case. In the dream world of literature, the scapegoat was not only
readmitted to society, he was idolized and imitated.

The detective figure also shows a direct and positive influence of
gay culture on the majority culture. It is noticeable that both Edward

Carpenter and Earl Lind attribute the Uranian’s unusual percipience.

[268]

Heroes of Modern Life
not to the acquired habit of avoiding detection and identifying fellow
homosexuals, but to an innate quality. It was this heightened awareness that fascinated the first sexologists and turned their readers into

amateur detectives. Pseudo-informative works like Woran erkennt man
Homosexuelle?'^ (1908) served the

same function as detective stories.

What was the secret sense that allowed these alien creatures to recognize one another at a glance and yet remain undetected? Was it innate
or acquired? Could a normal person learn to identify them?

The strange race of Uranians seemed to cross social and national
boundaries with ease and to thrive in that unfathomable environment,
the modern megalopolis. They retained their identity in the face of
aggressive conformity. While the average alienated citizen ran like a

tram from home to work and back again through uncharted zones of
danger, the homosexual was a true denizen of the
friends

city.

He found

among the faceless masses. He knew how to converse with

strangers.

His domestic arrangements were always open to change.

He had already adapted to the strange new world.
To most gay men and women, this fantasy would have seemed both
familiar and remote. Most would have been happy to exchange their
heroic special powers for respectability and affection.
*

The increasing visibility of ‘the homosexual’ in the 20th century^
impaired the crime-solving abilities of the gay detective. The article

on ‘Mystery and Detective Fiction’ in the Encyclopedia of Homosexuality
(1990), which says nothing about Dupin, Vautrin and Holmes, claims
that gay men did not appear in the detective novel until the 1930s.

But these were just the seedy stock-characters of earlier, melodramatic
fiction, like the eerily mincing Joel Cairo in The Maltese Falcon (1930).

Homosexuality was once again a mark of villainy and associated, not
with love, but with sinister genital intentions.

The 19th-century ‘sherlock’ probably died out before the Second
World War. The figure was already collapsing into farce when it had
a splendid late flowering in a film called The Arsenal Stadium Mystery

(1939), adapted

*

from an unremarkable novel by Leonard Gribble.

‘How to Recognize Llomosexuals’.

[269]

Strangers
Inspector Slade (played by Leslie Banks) is seen enjoying himself in

of compromising positions: interviewing a member of the
pre-War Arsenal football team in a steaming bath, reading a newspaper that covers the naked bottom of a player. To his Sergeant’s
a variety

disgust, he finds the case a thrilling prospect: ‘Well, all these outdoor

fellows with their er
Slade’s

.

.

.

shorts on.’

campness is the key to his deductive genius: ‘You know,

everybody has two sides to their nature’, he

tells

his

bemused

Sergeant. ‘We’ve all been indiscreet in our time.’ In the opening and
closing scenes, the Inspector, wearing a beret and a buttonhole,

is

rehearsing a chorus-line of sturdy policemen dressed in tutus: ‘Ladies,
ladies’,

he cries, ‘these skirts weren’t provided for you by Nature.

They’re meant to enhance your beauty, to allure. You must swish

’em about a bit and make ’em look attractive. [.

.

.]

The fair name of

the Metropolitan Police beauty chorus is at stake.’ When Sergeant

Clinton holds up a ballet dress, the Inspector observes with interest:
‘You know. Sergeant Smithers is getting a bit broad in the hips. That’s
the second time he’s split that.’

Like the sherlocks before him, Slade is not a public enemy but the

man who delves into the sewers of society and notices what others
cannot or will not see. He even has a civilizing influence on those
brutal enforcers of public morality, the Metropolitan Police. As long
as

Slade is on the case,

it is

hard to believe that it will all end in

tragedy:
Sergeant Clinton (watching the tutued policemen prance across the stage):

You know, you oughtn’t to be doing all this, Sir. These men will
never be the same again.’
Inspector Slade: ‘Well, that’s something to be thankful for.’

[270]

Appendices

—

—

—

Criminal Statistics

I.

Vere

0 8

Famous Cases
[

MP

Pillory abolished

Last execution

for sodomy

for sodomy

l.O'

POPULATION

Wm Bankes

Bishop of
Clogher

Street

r

|

Legal Events
\

^

\

'

.

0 6 .

OF

100,000

0 4.

0 2 .

T

r

i

I

I

I

I

I

I

—

I

—TT—n

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

—r— —
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

T"

PER

1810
(

1.

1830

1820
346 -)

(

217 )

1840
(

258 )

1850
(

411 )

Indictments for sodomy and related offences in England and Wales
per 100,000 of population, 1810-1900

2.

Percentage of convicted sodomites sentenced to death in England

and Wales, 1810-1861
1810-35: of 78 sentenced to death, 46 were executed.
Figures unavailable for 1819. No death sentences in 1832 and 1847.

I

r"i

Appendix I

Boulton & Park

Dublin

Cleveland

Oscar

Castle

Street

Wilde

POPULATION

OF

100,000

PER

Includes indecency after 1892. Figures unavailable for 1819.

Numbers in parentheses show actual numbers convicted, by decade.

All executions

3.

Executions for sodomy in England and Wales, 1805-35
Figures unavailable or incomplete for 1818 and 1819.

[273I

Appendices

4.

Recorded cases of buggery and related offences in England and Wales
per 100,000 of population, 1900-2000

No fibres for 1939.
Numbers in parentheses show total number of cases., by decade.

%

5.

Buggery and related offences in England and Wales as a percentage of
total recorded crime, 1900-2000

[274]

Appendix I

Note: The contrast between Graph 1 (1810-1900) and Graph 4 (1900-2000) should
probably be slightly greater. The 1 9th-century figures represent indicted individuals. The
later figures record ojfences, which usually involved two people. However, since the indictment

rate for

1810-1900 was approximately 50 per cent,

the two sets of figures are roughly

consistent.

6.

Arrests for sodomy and related offences in twelve American cities,

1875-1965
Each point represents the annual average, per city, for the five years to that point.

[^ 75 ]

II.

The

‘A Categoric Personal Analysis for the Reader’

following questions are selected and adapted from The Intersexes.

A History of Similisexualism as a Problem in Social Life, by ‘Xavier Mayne’
(Naples,

c.

1908).

The questionnaire, based on Magnus Hirschfeld’s, was

supposed to help readers decide whether or not they were homosexual. ‘It
can be filled out and taken to a confidential psychiater if the reader intends
to visit one.’

A. Heredity and Early Youth
1.

Do any of your parents or relatives ht v c similisexual traits?

2

Are there any unscrupulous intriguers, eccentrics, liars or kleptomaniacs in your

.

family?
3.

Did your father or mother (especially your mother) want a child of the other
sex?

4.

Was your teething normal and timely?

5.

As a child, were you mocked as a sissie or a tomboy?

6.

Did you develop an early taste for music, drawing and other arts?

7.

Did you have a good memory?

B. General Physical Traits, Capacities, Etc.
8.

Was your body (excluding face) unusually beautiful in childhood or youth?

9.

Are your bones and joints large or small?

10. Is your chest unusually flat or curved, broad or narrow?
1 1 .

Are your fingers pointed or blunt?

12. Is your handwriting small or large?
1 3 .

Are your feet large or small, broad or narrow? Do you have a high instep?

14.

Can you easily separate your big toe from the other toes by its own force?
C. Physiognomy and Kindred Details

15. Is your skin soft or rough, sensitive or insensitive?
16.

Do you give off an odour, especially when warm^?

[276]

Appendix II
17.

Are you unusually sensitive to pain? Do wounds heal quickly?

18.

Do you experience difficulty in coughing, spitting and swallowing?

19.

Are you a good whistler and do you like to whistle? Can you sing, and does it

20.

Are you comfortable wearing clothes intended for the opposite sex? When so

come naturally?
dressed, do you make a convincing man or woman?

D. Distinctively Sexual Characteristics
21

.

22.

Do you have an ideal sexual companion? If so, have you met your ideal?
Does your attraction depend partly on intellectual qualities or is it purely
physical?

23.

Do you consider yourself sexually potent to a marked degree?

24.

How often must you have sexual intercourse in order to feel at ease?

25.

Which is your preferred form of similisexual sex: coitus inter femora, coitus ani,
amplexus sine coitu, onanismus mutuus, onanismus buccalis, etc.?

26.

During intercourse, do you imagine performing the act with another person?

27.

Are you given to loving people whom you do not respect?

28.

Did you ever feel that a mere glance had revealed another person’s homosexuality
to you, or betrayed your own?

E. Various Moral, Temperamental, Habitual Traits, Etc.
29.

Are you talkative?

30.

Are you logical?

3 1

Are you artistic, and especially: do you like music and does it seem to contain a

.

mysterious personal message? Does music affect you sexually?
32. In painting,

do you most admire landscapes or figures? If the latter: male or

female, clothed or nude?
33.

Do you prefer to read prose or poetry; history, biography, travel and other more
solid literature? Or do you ‘like nothing so much as a good novel’?

Do you have a talent for acting?
Do you like prize-fights, bull-fights, dog-fights and football matches?
36. Do you see yourself as ‘a part of wild Nature’, as ‘a sort of tree, beast, bird,
34.
35.

torrent’?
37.
38.

Are animals particularly attracted to you?

Do you smoke, or care for strong drinks? Do you gamble? Do you instinctively
use strong language?

39.

Do you believe that the Similisexual is a higher or a lower form of human
nature?

U77]

III.

Uranian Europe

[278]

Appendix III

[279]

Acknowledgements

This book would not have existed without the work of Martin

Duberman, Lillian Faderman, Evelyn Hooker, Jonathan Katz, Rictor
Norton and most of the writers whose names appear in the
bibliography.
I

am happily indebted to Gill Coleridge, Starling Lawrence, Becky

Senior and Peter Straus for their support and good advice. Camilla
Elworthy, Andrew Kidd, Therese Mahoney, Simon Phillips and Alison

Robb also helped to make this a strangely merry adventure.
Stephen Roberts comprehensively improved the original draft.

Margaret wrote the book with me.

Notes

For full references, see the list of works cited.
JfsZ = Jahrbuch fiir sexuelle Zivischenstufen

1.

Prejudice

crime’: McCormick, 285.

1.

‘that most horrid

2.

Baron de Charlus: Proust, III, 429. E.g. Pushkin on his friend Filipp

.

.

.

Filippovich Vigel: ‘I shall put his portrait behind all the others’, etc.:

Pushkin, 616.
3.

‘This sin is now so frequent’, etc.: Anselm to Archdeacon William;
Trumbach in Duberman (1989), 131 (cf. Pepys, 1 July 1663); Matthews,
13 January 1811, in Crompton (1985), 161; Wilson, in Reade, 6;

Martineau, in Lacassagne, ‘Pederastie’, 250; Adler, vi.
5.

‘abnormal conditions’: Lydston, 34.

7.

Lilith:

G. S. Viereck, The Candle and the Flame (1912), in Gifford,

89-90.
7.

sexually undifferentiated organisms: Gley (1884), in JfsZ, VI (1904),

477; Kiernan (1884) and Lydston (1888), in Weininger, 56-7; Ellis,

312-15 (summary); Proust, III, 31; Chevalier (1893), 410.

7.

Xq28 region of the X chromosome: e.g. Hamer-Copeland, 14d— 8.
Napoleonic Wars: Crompton (1985), 167.

7.

Marquis de Boissy: Burton, 190; see also Bleys 112 and 127.

7.

‘came to them from Europe’: Gide (1924), 47.

7.

7.

The Whip: Katz, in Duberman (1997), 223.

8.

Erench dictionary: La Chatre, II (‘Pederaste’).

8.

tendency to live in London: Wellings et al., 227.

Notes
10.
12.

‘unisexuals’: Raffalovich, 77-8.

10.

Himmler’s theory: Mosse, 167.
anal intercourse also commonly practised: e.g. Benkert, in Blasius,
75; Casper (1881), 120; Ellis, 283; Krafft-Ebing, 258; Lacassagne,
in Raffalovich,

18-19 n.; Moll, 134; Pouillet, 12-13; ‘Risks for

Sexually Transmitted Diseases - A Pilot Study’ (U. of Chicago,

November 1996).
12.

^homos’ + ^sexus''. e.g. discussion in Vlnterme diaire des chercheurs et

curieux (1907), 774, 822, 878-9, suggesting ‘homeosexuel’,

‘homeophyse’ and ‘homophysique’.
12.

Spain and Canada: see Eisenberg (Spain) and Maynard (Canada).

13.

‘attitudes of a particular society’: Eield Marshal Montgomery, Daily

Mail, 27 May 1965; Mary Whitehouse, Whatever Happened to Sex?
(1977); The Star, 2 and 9 September 1986 (last three from Davenport-

Hines).
14.

Mansfield Park: ch. 6. J. Bate, in TLS, 4 August 1995; Woods, 138.

2.

17.

In the Shadows

laws, court records, etc.: see especially: Chauncey, Cocks, Coward,

D’Emilio - Freedman, Engelstein, Eskridge, Gilbert, Greenberg,
Harvey, Hekma, Higgs, Hirschfeld (1914), Hitchcock,

Hocquenghem, Krafft-Ebing, Meer (1984), Merrick, Moran, Nabokov,
Norton (1997), Prime-Stevenson (1908), Sibalis, in Merrick-Ragan,
Walmsiey, Weeks (1989). Some figures for England and Wales are
available at: homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/100years.xls
18.

‘lesbians also suffered’: Cf. L.

Crompton’s 1980 article, ‘The Myth

of Lesbian Impunity’, questioned, e.g., by Kord, in Kuzniar, 229;
see also Meer (1991).

and deceitful practices’: in Faderman (1994), 155.

18.

‘false

19.

Vere Street case: Holloway; Norton (1992), 187-98.

20. village of Faan: L. J. Boon and T. van der Meer, in Gerard-Hekma;

L. von Romer, mJfsZ, VIII (1906), 365-511.
20.

pragmatic, secular view: Monter (on Suisse romande).

20.

If Wilde had been convicted: Norton (1997), 141.

21.

ewe (1834): Hyde (1970), 91-2.

21.

fowl (1877): PRO

22.

naval court-martials: Harvey; also Gilbert.

HO 45/9427/61018.

[282]

:

Notes
23.

H. Huussen, in Maccubbin; cf. T. van

last execution for sodomy: A.

der Meer, in Gerard-Hekma, 268 (last execution in 1765).
25.
23. gay ‘genocide’: e.g. Crompton (1978).
25.
23. Jefferson and others: Katz (1976), 24.

‘sodomy arrests’: Eskridge, 25.
26.

In British India: Khanna.

26.
25.

‘a

26.

community in Chartres: M. Sibalis, in Merrick-Ragan, 91-2.

hoary miscreant’: Harvey, 942.

‘Pearce unbutt’d my Breeches’: Harvey, 942.

Cleveland Street: Chester et al.; Hyde (1976).
27.
26.

Conspiracy theory: Aronson.

26.

As Harry Cocks suggests: Cocks, 222.

27.

Code Penal of 1791: Not the work of an individual, though
Napoleon’s famously homosexual arch-chancellor Cambaceres is

29.

often given the credit.
'abusos deshonestos^

Eisenberg.

30.
27.

‘traces of habitual pederasty’: Lalande; Robb (2000), 223-4.

28.

diaspora of ‘pederasts’: Carlier, 444-7 and table.

28.

‘Normal’ prostitutes: Carlier, 277.

29.

‘A wealthy foreign gentleman’: Canler, 122-3.
files

of the Prefecture: Gunther.

29.

a well-known pianist: Gury, 124.

30.

toilets in Toronto: Maynard.

Madrid, Barcelona, Copenhagen, etc.: Hirschfeld, in Bland-Doan,
229; Casper (1871); D. Healey and G. Hekma, in Higgs; W. van

Rosen, in Gerard-Hekma.
30.

‘Pederasty Division’: Haas, II,

1.

Obituary of Meerscheidt-Hiillessem:

JfsZ, IV (1902), 947-55.
30.

‘Pink Lists’: Muller, 321.

31.

‘orgies in private homes’: Carlier, 471.

32.

‘exterminating them in herds’: Crisp, 76.

32.

United States (Graph 6): based on Eskridge.

32.

sodomy prosecutions in France: Lever; M. Rey, in Gerard-Hekma
and Maccubbin; summary by C. Courouve (1999): http://
jgir.multimania.com/procsod.htm

32.

‘Brigade Mondaine’: ‘Fichier general de la Brigade Mondaine’,

Prefecture de Police, Paris, March 1968: rpt. C. Courouve.
32.

In Germany, paragraph 175: e.g. Mondimore, 214; Muller, 321-3.

33.

The Soviet Union: Engelstein. Swedish figures in Rydstrom, 246.

[283]

Notes
35.
33.
35.

‘snowball’ effect: Norton (1997), 139.

‘Your Lordship’s delicacy’: 13 January 1811, Crompton (1985), 161.
‘booby-trap’: Wilde (2000), 690.

36.
35.
36.

‘unnatural habits, tastes and practices’: Holland, 39.

36.

‘rose-leaf lips’: Holland, 105; Hyde (1973), 116.

37.

‘Did you ever kiss’: Holland, 207-8.

37. ‘Never was Paris so crowded’: Harris (1916), 146.
37.
36. Medieval legend: e.g. Ashbee (1879), 69.
37.

Daily Telegraph reporter: 6 April 1895: in Goodman, 75.

Anglican clergyman: Ellmann, 441-2; Hyde (1973); Sinfield; etc.
Louise Jopling: Twenty Years of My Life (1925), 82: in Reade.
38.
38.

‘the Love that dare not speak its name’: Douglas’s poem, ‘Two Loves’;

Hyde (1973), 201.
37. W. T. Stead: The Review of Reviews,
1895: Hyde (1973), 340-1.
37. Illustrated Police Budget: Goodman, 130.
38. ‘too low to appreciate’: Hyde (1973), 258.
‘public school colours’: Hyde (1973), 146.
‘the rage against Wilde’: Hyde (1973), 164 n.
‘unnatural union’ with Ireland: McCalman, 149.
38. Dublin Castle affair (1884): e.g. Hyde (1970), 127-33.
38. troublesome Irish MP: Hyde (1970), 137.
38.

3.

Country of the Blind

40.

‘The psychoanalytic press’: Adler, 49.

40.

‘There is more variety’: Brouardel, in Lacassagne, ‘Pederastie’, 256.

42.

‘The sodomite had been a sinner’: Foucault, 59. See, e.g.,

D’Emilio-Freedman, in Nye, 110; Trumbach, 3. The best informed
application of the construction theory is Greenberg’s: e.g. 407-8.
42.

‘hermaphrodism of the soul’: L. J. Boon, in Gerard-Hekma, 246
(‘hermaphrodites in their minds’, 1734); also Casper (1881), 118

(‘hermaphrodisme moral’, i.e. ‘mental’). Early studies of mental and
hereditary ‘perversion’: Briere de Boismont (see also G. Hekma, in

Bremmer); P. Lucas; Moreau, 159 (referring to father’s memoir
in nUnion medicale, 1850); Moreau de Tours (1859); Morel.

43.

‘There was light’: Thoinot, 297-8.

43.

ancient authors: Chevalier, 72-3 and 84 (Parmenides and Herodotus);
Schrijvers (Soranus); Beard, 66 (Hippocrates).

[284]

Notes
44.
44.
44.

Pueblos of New Mexico; Chevalier, 280; Katz (1976), 304.
Hippocrates as authority: e.g. Morel (1852-3).
genital anomalies: e.g. Drs Ottolenghi (1888) and Virgilio (1889), in

Hofmann, 180.
44.

over-developed clitorises: Parent-Duchatelet; Beaude

(‘Hermaphrodisme’); Debay, 45; Larousse (‘Tribade’; also
45.
‘Clitorisme’); Delvau (‘Anandryne’); Christian, 371 (rare).

45.

‘masculine type of larynx’: Theodor Simon Flatau, in Ellis, 255; also
Krafft-Ebing, 301 (from Moll).

46.
‘I

have encountered’: Cabanis, 311.

46.
45.

Lucien de Rubempre: Balzac, V, 145-6.

46.

‘The distinctive characteristics’: Walker, 154. On A. Weil: Hodann,
53-4.
‘infundibular’ anus before Tardieu: e.g. Cullerier, in Reydellet (1819),

45; Lauvergne (1841), 289.
48.
48.
46.
48.
47.

‘I

have seen one pederast’: Tardieu, 178.

‘Curled hair’: Tardieu, 173.
‘succubus’ and ‘incubus’: Tburdes-Metzquer, 222.

47. whistling: Ellis, 143, 191
49.
49. (1994), 152 and 384.

and 256; also ‘Earl Lind’ (1918), 37; Ulrichs

49.
48.

inability to urinate: e.g. Tardieu, 189.

50.

Uranists become heavy smokers: Moll, 92.

‘I

50.

50.

must show myself: Ulrichs (1994), 550.

bone-crushing handshake: Proust, IV, 388; Rivers, 73.

48.

Throw an object: Hirschfeld (1914), 194.

49.

‘sidereal pendulum’: Hirschfeld (1914), 196.

51.

‘But just as the fellow’: Dio Chrysostom, 329.

51.

Raphael Kirchner: Muller, 318.

Sunday Mirror: David, 197-8.
not necessary to be homosexual’: Allen, in Plummer, 181.

49.

‘It is

50.

caustic Dead Sea: Le Baillif de la Riviere, 34.
‘If several women’:

Lombroso-Eerrero, 403.

typical show of revulsion: Fodere, IV, 574.

‘cerebro-spinal’: Colin, 216-7 (Magnan’s classification).
50.

‘self-respect’: Walker, 162.

51.

Giraud’s ‘ragged fundament’: Basilius, quoted in Anon. (1866?), 74.
‘the Ganymedes’ syphilis’: Ashbee (1879), 405; Littre (‘Cristalline’).

Paresis: Katz (1976), 367; and see p. 165.

[285]

Notes
51.

‘cancers in the womb’: Tissot, 52; also ‘Saphisme’, by ‘D.’, in
Dictionnaire encyclopedique des sciences medicates,
51.

52.

XV (addenda) (1885).

tuberculosis, dropsy and typhoid: Henke, 105-6; also Wildberg, in F.

Dohrn, ‘Zur Lehre von der Paderastie’, Revue trimestrielle de
medecine legale (Berlin, 1855).

52.

Sir Alexander Morison: Norton (1992), 261.

‘Adhesiveness’ in The Lancet: Lynch, 84.
53.
52.

The Principles and Practice: Taylor, 1018; 3rd ed.: II, 458-61.

52.

British Medical Journal: Porter-Hall, 162-3.

53.

widespread homosexual culture: prostitutes: Parent-Duchatelet, 1836;
convicts: Lauvergne, 1841; criminals: Tardieu, 1857; Canler, 1862.
‘an enthusiastic love’: In Moritz’s Magazin fur Erfahrungsseelenkunde,

VIII (Berlin, 1791).
53.

disciplinary lines: Beyond France and Germany, the first major

medical studies specifically devoted (at least in part) to what was later
called homosexuality appeared as follows: Italy, 1878 (Tamassia);
Britain, 1882 (article on ‘Perverted Sexual Instincts’ in Brain, by J.

Krueg, a Viennese doctor); USA, 1882 (Blumer and Kiernan);
Holland, 1883 (Donkersloot); Russia, 1884 (Tarnovsky); Denmark,
1891 (Pontoppidan); Portugal, 1896 (Silva); Spain, 1929 (Maranon).
54.

Sandor Ferenczi: Fernandez, 91-3.

55.

‘contrary sexual feeling’: ^Contrdre Sexualempfindung’ implied a

misdirection of the sexual instinct. The Italian equivalent, Hnversione
sessuale\ first used by Arrigo Tamassia in 1878, was eventually

preferred. The English ‘sexual inversion’ appeared in the title of

Symonds’ pamphlet of 1883. The French 'inversion" was used by
Charcot and Magnan in an article of 1882. A common Dutch term

was 'verkeerde liefhebbers" (wrong or mistaken lovers: cf. Westphal’s
‘Verkehrung’). Ulrichs’ ‘Urning’ (English: ‘Uranian’ or ‘Uranist’:
see p. 53) reflected a similarly conservative view of sexuality (true

men like women, true women like men) but defined the difference
in constitutional rather than pathological terms: ‘That an actual man
would feel sexual love for a man is impossible. The Urning is not a
true man. He is a mixture of man and woman.’ Ulrichs, Araxes (1870).
Tr. J. Steakley, in Blasius-Phelan, 64.

55.

Pleas of insanity: case of William North, 22 November 1822: Orr,
‘Public Opinion in London

55.

.

.

.’.

a ‘third sex’: Lauvergne, 288 (‘un sexe douteux’); Gautier, 144; Balzac,

VI, 840 (variant: ‘le dernier sexe’); Chevalier, 486.

[286]

:

Notes
'homo mollis': Frankel; Kennedy, 59-60.

55.
56.

'Examination of Pederasts' Vibert, 334.

56.

‘lubricated fingers’: in Muller, 109.

56.

cold hands: in Lacassagne, ‘Pederastie’, 25^5.

57.

‘the Government’s penis’: Corbin,

58.

‘Urnings near and far’: Ulrichs (1994), 549.

58.
61.
61.
59.

‘attained its enormous popularity’: in C. White, 316.

60.

‘I

was so unhappy’: Casper (1881), 119.

61.

‘I

could write volumes’: Krafft-Ebing, 279.

134 n.

‘He confesses’: Chevalier, 321-3.

‘like husband

and wife’: Krafft-Ebing, 236.

‘commoner than I imagine’: Symonds (1984), 281; for texts by

62.

Symonds, see also Norton, comp.
61.

'No one suspects’: Muller, 209.

61.
63.
61.
63.

‘First, I must beg’:

65.
62.

‘Father, Mother, forgive me!’: Otto de Joux: Muller, 238-9.

‘a

Krafft-Ebing, 249.

born homosexual’: Hirschfeld (1905), 44.

de Rode and Strassmann: Muller, 258-9.
62.

‘Novel of a Born Invert’: Saint-Paul, 89.

63.

‘Books like yours’: G. Herelle, ‘Lettre-preface pour une reponse au
questionnaire du docteur Laupts’: Lejeune, 90.

French prospectus: Pollard, 90.
‘lewd, wicked, bawdy’: Pearsall, 239; Weeks (1977), 60-1.

Edmund White and Martin Duberman: e.g. P. Robinson, 335-6.
perpetual discord’: Symonds (1984), 283.

65.

‘a

65.

‘Is it right

65.

‘Miss L.’: Krafft-Ebing, 308.

66.

‘Be in no doubt’: Lejeune, 90.

67.

‘They had to, of course’: Rivers, 166.

67.

Ulrichs’ neologisms: His main categories are 1. Dioning (heterosexual,

to chastise’: ‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 23.

including the Uraniaster^ or ‘faute-de-mieux’ homosexual); 2.
'

Uming

(abnormal man), including the Mdnnling (attracted to effeminate
men), Weibling (attracted to masculine men) and Zwischen-Uming
(attracted to adolescents); 3. Uranodioninge (attracted to both sexes);
4. Hermaphrodite. All these categories have

female equivalents:

Urningin, Dioningin, etc.
67.

Kertbeny: real name, Karl Maria Benkert: Haas, I, 2; trans. in
Blasius-Phelan. Benkert is an important figure in the history of

comparative literature. Baudelaire (II, 959) received a poorly spelt

[287]

^

letter from him in

Notes

1864 and wrote on it: ‘The man who knows 52

languages. Obviously he only knows 51.’ However, the attribution of
the word ‘homosexuality’ to Benkert is uncertain. Jaeger’s source, ‘Dr
M.’, really was a doctor, unlike Benkert, and was bom in about 1820:
JfsZ^ II (1900), 53-9. (Benkert was born in 1824.)

A little-known

predecessor of the word was used by Proudhon in 1858: 'homoiousien\
usually applied to the Trinity (‘of the same essence’): Courouve (1985),
69.
69.
67.
69.
68.
69.
70.
70.
70.

130.

‘Thereafter he adopted’: Ellis, 272.
anal intercourse: see note 12 on p. 282.

‘A physician is not blamed’: Karlinsky, 274.

Katherine Mansfield: Alpers, 96; Boddy, 29 and 40.
cold baths: Katz (1976),

13^5; Acton, 203; Austen, ch. 1.

Wellington School: Hyam, 67; see also Lyttelton, 17.
69.

drastic cures: Moll, 273; Magnan (1885), in Chevalier, 509.

70.
71.

‘Many even lack awareness’: Krafft-Ebing, 260.
‘I seek no remedy’: Krafft-Ebing, 280.

71.
71.

incidence of nervous complaints: Saint-Paul, 230.
‘I

70.
72.
72.
71.

have often had occasion’: Tardieu, 169.

A medical encyclopedia: L. Blumenstok, in Real-Encyclopadie der
gesammten Heilkunde, 2nd ed.: H. Kennedy, in Rosario, 36-7.
‘omosessualismo’ and ‘uranismo’: Morselli, 680-2.

‘One would certainly not’: Charcot; Magnan, 184.
‘Uranists weeping’: Moll, 113; also Mantegazza (1886), in
73.

Dallemagne, 509.

73.

‘Oh, dear sad memories!’: Gamier, 388.

71.

‘one can, without much risk’: in Saint-Paul, 253.

72.
74.

‘sexual perversion can coexist’: Ball, 140; also Eere, 444.

‘Ever since I gave free rein’: Muller, 223.
‘innate inversion’: Westphal, 324.
72.

laws against transvestism: facsimile of ‘Transvestism Permit’ (for Rosa

Bonheur) in Stanton, 364. On Bonheur: Cooper, 47-9; Van
Casselaer, 41.
73.

‘in whose

domain they belong’: Westphal, 352.

‘lucid psychopaths’: Chevalier, 457.
^chastise or sequester':

73.
74.

Chevalier, 474.

Heinz Tovote: J. Jones, 132.
‘double inversion’: Saint-Paul, 313.

bladder washing: Katz (1976), 149.

[288]

Notes
74.
‘pull up

75.
74.
75.
75.

my socks’: Westwood, 41 (Michael Schofield: Higgins, 135).

‘Get married’: Gide (1947), 29-30.
a tax on bachelors: Aldrich (‘Tardieu’).

boudoirs and harems: Muller, 144; Hirschfeld (1914), 497.
‘I

can do it!’: Goncourt, II, 1003.

75.
76.
75.

patient who fled in horror: Moll, in Saint-Paul, 318 n.

75.

‘But tell it in England’: Hyde (1973), 311.

77.
76.

‘When a contrary-sexual’: Kraflt-Ebing, 345.

the dentist’s chair: Hartland, 67.

treated by Krafft-Ebing: Muller, 143-4; KraflFt-Ebing, 341.
78.
76.

‘spontaneous erections’: Bernheim, 338-9.

78.
77.

80.

Dr Quackenbos: Hale, 244; Katz (1976), 144—5.
Edmund Bergler: in David, 180.

77.

a ‘poisonous’ effect: Katz (1976), 135.

78.

‘therapeutic nihilism’: Schrenck-Notzing, ch. 9.

Erank Lydston: Katz (1976), 590 n. 5

E E. Daniel: Katz (1976), 136.
78.

^

No sexual pervert’: Lydston, 51.

‘Homosexuality is assuredly’: Ereud, in E. Jones, III, 195-6.
80.

Die contrare Sexualempfindung: 2nd ed., 1893. Translated into French
in 1893 (6th ed., 1897) and eventually English: Perversions of the Sex
Instinct: a Study of Sexual Inversion Based on Clinical Data and Official

Documents

1931).

80.

‘One is no more likely’: Moll, 213.

81.

‘Man generally performs’: Moll, 289.

82.

‘One can easily see’: Moll, 190.

82.

‘Since abstinence’: Moll, 295.

82.

‘To make a complete study’: Moll, 186.

4.

Outings

86.

‘Ever since I came’: 27 July 1818: Luppe, 72.

86.

‘Sitting on the ruins’: 11

86.

‘the only feelings’: Duras, 148.

86.

‘Few people’: Luppe, xiii. On Varnhagen von Ense: Eldorado, 133.

86.

‘Is this

87.

‘As long as we speak’: Custine, 29.

87.

Edward Sainte-Barbe: Muhlstein, 174.

November 1818: Luppe, 73.

misfortune?’: 25 November 1820: Luppe, 85.

[289]

Notes
87.

In November 1824: L’Etoile, 6 November 1824; then in Le Moniteur,

87.

La Quotidienne, Le Journal des Debats.
‘My God, what a sordid combination’: Luppe, 100.

88.
89.

‘a

88.

‘black depths’: Luppe, 259-60.

89.

‘Any friendship that lasts’< Courouve (1985), 31.

89.

‘Sgricci is here improvising’: Crompton (1985), 245.

89.

under surveillance in Florence: E. Del Cerro, in Dall’Orto.

90.

'Des soins divers’: Viel-Castel, I, 206.

stranger to everything’: Muhlstein, 184.

‘They were barely in the street’: Delecluze, 343.

90. Julie Candeille: Delecluze, 181.

91.

Foucault pointed out: Foucault, 97.

92.

‘That his affinity with Hellenism’: Westminster Review, January 1867:

D. Donoghue, 47.
92.

‘those who are observant’: quoted by Pater: Gay (1984-98), II, 240.

On Winckelmann and Goethe: Derks; S. Richter and R. Tobin, in
Kuzniar.
92.

experiments with sodomy: Casanova, II, 270^; Gay (1959), 290-1
(Voltaire); Flaubert, I,

572 and 638 (15 January and 2 June 1850).

96.
93.

Winckelmann

94.

Carl Justi’s biography: Gay (1984-98), IV, 177-8.

’s

private letters: Derks, 179 ff.

94. L’Amitie antique: Dugas, 94; see also Delepierre.
94.

some British scholars: see Dowling; Turner.

94.

skin temperature and Galanterien von Berlin: Derks, 90 ff.

95.

Heine and Platen: Bumm, 533; Derks, 505.

96.

investigation of Iffland: Derks, 436; also Kleist, 448 and Heine’s

98.

attack on Platen (‘der gaselige Iffland’).

Even Havelock Ellis: Ellis, 179.
96.

‘My tastes incline me’: Moers, 270; see also Goncourt, I, 323; Barbey

97.

Marquess of Anglesey: ^Z, III (1901), 544; also Bloch, 413; Hyde

97.

Fred Barnes: P. Bailey.

98.

North American Indians: e.g. Bancroft; Bleys, 18, etc.;

d’Aurevilly.

(1970), 153-4.

D’Emilio-Freedman, 7; Karsch-Haack; Katz (1976), 292-318; J.
Grahn, in Kehoe 43 (lesbianism); A. Robinson, 32-3; Roscoe, in

Duberman (1997).
unfortunate and hilarious aberration: Macintosh (1981), 35.
98.

In the 1830s: Gatlin, I, 15 and 111-13.

[290]

Notes
98. Trial of Boulton and Park: N. Bartlett in Goldberg; Cohen, 78-117;

Farrer; Hyde (1970), 95; Roughead, 149-83.
100.
101.

‘minstrelization’: Weeks (1989), 111.

101.

division of labour, etc.: Greenberg, 356.

101.

‘Crimes of the Clergy’: by William Benbow: Ashbee (1879), 46-50;

Crompton (1985), 308-9; also McCalman, 149; Norton (1992).
102.

‘unnatural practices’: Rowse, 126.

102.

‘My Lord Gomorrah’: Chester et al., 177.
Gibbon found it ‘astonishing’: Crompton (1985), 233.
‘even the law-abiding citizens’: Norton (1992), 117; see also

103.

Greenberg, 340.

101.

102.

‘Ninety-nine normal men’: Ellis, 351. Similar tolerance in 18th-

century Paris: Coward, 239.
103.

Druids’ Hall drag ball: Cocks, 89-90.

104.

Saul was interviewed: Weeks (1989), 114.

103.
104. Voyeuristic tours: e.g. Paris (M. Wilson, in Epstein-Straub, 210);

New York (‘Earl Lind’).
104.

‘Jack the Ripper’:

The Illustrated Police News, 26 October 1889:

Bartlett, 110.

Beckford at Eonthill: Mowl, 207.
'favourite Propensity': Thrale, II, 799.

104.

‘Ah! Mr. EitzGerald’: Blyth, 80.

104.

Carpenter at Millthorpe: Carpenter (1916); also Weeks (1977), 79.

105.

Edward Shelley: Hyde (1973), 191.

106.

‘simulated and hypocritical’: Murray, 309. Other examples of public

sympathy (once the victim had died or been punished): Roger
Casement, after his arrest as a spy and the surreptitious circulation
of the ‘Black Diaries’ - now known to be genuine; Eriedrich Krupp

and ‘Eighting Mac’ Macdonald, after suicide (1902 and 1903); the
radical German lawyer Jean Baptiste von Schweitzer, jailed for

indecent behaviour but later President of the Workingmen’s
Association and member of the North German Reichstag (Gay

(1984-98), II, 245; Steakley, 1-3.) On Johannes von Muller (later

denounced as ‘unGerman’): Bumm, 189; Derks, 247, 344, etc.
106.

black-balling Sodomites: Proust, III, 33.

106.

‘the antipathy itself: Bentham, ‘Offences Against One’s Self.

107.

Lincoln and Speed: Katz (2001), 14.

107.

Edward McCosker: Katz (1976), 29-32.

108.

Thomas Jefferson Withers: Duberman (1986), 5 ff.

[291]

Notes
108. Albert Dodd: Gay (1984-98), II, 208-12.
109.
109. ‘stubbornly ambiguous objects’: Deitcher, 14. See also Bush.

‘A man crying’: Cohen, 177.
109.

In a communal bed: Chateaubriand, I, 7, 6.

109.
110.
110.

‘[T. A. said]’: McCormick,

275.

‘wooden-walled Gomorrahs’: White-Jacket, quoted by H. Beaver in
Melville (1985), 43.

mining camps: Chauncey (1994), 91 n.; Hyam, 98; Johnson.
110.

old American sailor: Katz in Duberman (1997), from B. R. Burg.

110. ‘sexual cocytus’: Ellis, 121.
112.
111. Katharine Davis: D’Emilio-Freedman, 193.
111. Willy and Parsifal: Courouve (1985), 130.
112.

Daily Telegraph: Cohen, 94.

112.

new
persecution complex: Legrand du Saulle, 119 and 462-3.
‘Who is he’: Crain, 171.
Coleridge on Shakespeare: Marginalia, 2 November 1803: see Woods,
.

112.

.

.

104.
112.
114.

dreams of being sexually assaulted: Marginalia, 13 December 1803;
see also Paglia, 342-3.

113.
115.
113.

‘Discourse on the Manners’: Notopoulos, 413.

114.

‘The kiss of friendship’: Bloch, 398-9; also Greenberg, 341; Spencer,

‘I

began to be apprehensive’: Smollett, ch. 51.

234.

Whitman’s salute: ‘Behold this swarthy face’.
114.

William Cobbett: Crain, 130.

115.

‘We agreed it was a scandal’: Lister, No Priest, 32.
‘That’s a man’, etc.: Lister, 1 Know, 49; No Priest, 37-8.

115.

‘Brought on the subject’: Lister, 1 Know, 156.

116. whirligigs and John Lockhart: Mavor, 162.
117.

‘Three o’clock dinner’: Mavor, 40.

117.

‘damned Sapphists’: Norton (1997), 203.

117.
117.

Anne Lister to Llangollen: Lister, I Know, 210.
Byron and Edlestone: Crompton (1985), 102.

117.

‘Two women’: Colette, 617-18.

118.

General Evening Post: M. 2CVOY, 136.

119.

‘even doubtful if it can exist’: Faderman (1985). On the supposed

non-existence of lesbians: Castle; E. Donoghue.
121.

‘The facts that will cure’: Murdoch, 6.

[292]

Notes

5.

Miraculous Love

125.

Peter Doyle: Kaplan, 311-12.

126.
128.
126.

Tchaikovsky to his brother: Poznansky, 12.
‘various manipulations’; love life and legend: Poznansky, 16, 13,

19-28, 196 and 213-20.

examples of cross-dressing: Morgan (200-1) cites non-sexual reasons
for cross-dressing: freedom, employment, economy, fear of being

129.
128.

arrested as a prostitute.
‘position of a young person’: Gosse to Symonds, 5 March 1890:

Grosskurth, 282.
129.

‘Two years ago’: Ellis, 134.
Lytton Strachey: Askwith, 53.

129.

‘Miss Right’: Ackerley, 153.

129. Mikhail Kuzmin: Malmstad-Bogomolov, 30.

129. understanding parents: Prime-Stevenson (1908), 183; Hirschfeld
130.
(1905), 45.
129.

Christmas: Hirschfeld (1905), 50-2.

129.

‘she ran away from home’: Krafft-Ebing, 317.

129.

pining for a woman: Krafft-Ebing, 319.

130.

‘Erau von T.’: Krafft-Ebing, 313-15.
Sackville-West: Nicolson, 140, etc. On lavender marriages: article by

Hirschfeld in JfsZ, III (1901), 37-71.
130.

An army doctor: Muller, 352.

131.
135.
131.

My Life: C. White, 275.

132.

Karl Heinrich Ulrichs: Kennedy; Steakley; Ulrichs (1994).

132.

134.

‘My dear sister’ and replies: Ulrichs (1899), 40-51.
‘My dear ones’ and replies: Ulrichs (1899), 49-57.
‘stimulate a romantic feeling’: Symonds (1984), 135 and 141.
‘shoals of painted
youths’: Chauncey (1994), 116 and 179.

135.

‘I

133.
136.
134.

‘carefully hid’ and Les Faux-Monnayeurs:

.

Gide (1947), 19 and 111.

.

.

will be the robust husband’: ‘A

Woman Waits For Me’.

Hilda Maria Kakikoski: T. Juvonen, in Aldrich-Wotherspoon, 237.
135.
135.

Minnie Benson: Askwith, 134, 192, etc.
Carl Pontus Wikner: A

.

Norstrom, in Aldrich-Wotherspoon, 485-6.

Author’s translation.
136.

into the river Avon: Symonds (1984), 195.

'FEVERLSYL, fluctuating’: Kaplan, 316; cf. Bullough, 49.

[2931

Notes
136.
‘a

136.
137.
137.

great big hearty’: Kaplan, 313.

Whitman to Symonds: Kaplan, 47.
‘I

have never professed’: Lucien, 152-3.

London Library: Ann Thwaite, in Norton (1997), 162.
137.

destroyed by his widow: Lovell, 791.

137.
138.
137.

‘a

packet of letters’: Askwith, 209.

‘thwarted, frustrated’: Noakes, 131.

138. Austrian army: Ulrichs, Memnon, in Ellis, 23.

French soldiers in Algeria: Duchesne, 41.
138. Llave de Oro: Ashbee (1879), 69.

138.

‘observations on the lower animals’: Ellis, 241.

139. ‘I do not think’: Prince, 118.
141.
139. Platen and Schmidtlein: Bumm, 210-19; Derks, 492-6.
141.
140. Albert Glatigny: ‘L’Honnete scrupule’, in Lariviere (1998), 141-2.
140.

‘They lived together’: Ramdohr, II, lOA-7.

142.
141.
142.

Sodome et Gomorrhe: Proust, III, 9.
‘the Ephebe of Kritios’: Ackerley, 164.

‘As we approached Mitilini’: Barney, 78.

141.

‘Did you sy they was niked?’: F. Harris, in Dowling, 145.

142.

‘the Greenwood’: Forster, Maurice,

120 and 221.

‘what was the good’: Ackerley, 173.
143.
142.

142.
144.

‘lawless’ and ‘godless’:
‘All

Symonds (1984), 254.

“abnormal” sex-acts’: in Ackerley, xiv.

strange lights: in Formatrix (1865) (Muller, 197): this and similar

passages omitted by Hirschfeld from his edition of Ulrichs’ writings
(1898).

142.
145.

‘This ought not to be seen’: quoted by Norton (1997), 166.

143.

Charlotte Bronte: E. Miller, in Lesbian History Group.

Baron von Pregnitz: Isherwood, 26, 109 and 27.
146.
143.

‘Sir William Jones’: Lister, No Priest, 32.

144.

‘like
‘I

old Tiresias’: Lister, 1 Know, 235-6.

have a question to ask’: Lister, No Priest, 26.

144. Alexander Berkman: Berkman, II, ch. 10; Katz (1976), 532.

145.

‘like

those questioning phrases’: Proust, III, 7.

Nikolai Gogol: Karlinsky (1834 and 36).
145.

‘Do you know

146.

would hasten after him’: Ackerley, 173.
‘less bother than a Zanetto’: Murphy, Rimbaud (1991), 73; Robb

.

.

.’:

J. Jones,

183-4.

‘I

(

2000 ), 100

.

[294]

Notes
146.

'Seeking a friend’: Carlier, 451.

147.

classified ads: Hirschfeld (1905),

147.

‘Socrates’ or ‘modern’: e.g. Lorrain (1929), 72: ‘a very

60-1; Nacke, in JfsZ, V, 2 (1903),

319-50; Katz (1976), 48.
.

.

.

modern

though timid boyfriend’.
147.
147.

‘there could be no doubt’: Krafft-Ebing, 302; Moll, 315.

A homosexual philologist: ^Z, V, 2 (1903), 950-1, from Friihrot,
freiradikale Zeitschrift, 8-13 (1901); Hirschfeld (1914), 535-6.

148.

‘I

kiss you as skilfully

148.

‘I

enjoyed that wonderful promptness’: Colette, 597 {Le Pur et

.

.

.’:

Pichois-Brunet, 111.

rimpur).
148. James to Symonds: quoted from L. Edel’s edition.
150.
148. Italian //own-: James (1992), 18.
150.
149. Mann to Weber: Reed, 85 (Reed’s translation). Generally: Heilbut.
150. parlare: also ‘parlary’, ‘polari’, ‘parlyaree’. Hayes; I. Lucas; Macintosh

(1973); Norton (1997), 115-18; Weeks (1989), 111 and (1990), 138.
‘It

151.
151.

smells of garlic’: Chevalier, 250.

‘chestnut gatherer’: Courouve (1985); Lacassagne-Devaux

151.

(‘Pederaste’).

150.

Erench slang dictionary: Delvau.

151.

red neckties: Ellis, 298-9; also Anon. (1893), 32; Healey, 40 and 281
n. 90.

velvet ties and red boots: Healey, 39.
152.

‘poufs’: Anon. (1850), in Ashbee (1877), 405.

152.

tapping the back of one hand: T. van der Meer, in Gerard-Hekma,
288: also, in 1689, by kicking one another’s feet.

151.

Parisian poodles: Taxil, 263.

153. galbinati: or galbanati. Chevalier, 90; Ellis, 298; Martial, 3, 82, 5.
151.

On

green, also: Winn, 182-3.
152.
154.

‘Yet there were those’: P. Bailey, 29-30.
‘Subtlety, ambiguity’: Meyers, 3.

‘There is a strange’: 21 December 1927 (Lawrence, 38-9; see also
262).

probably been insulted’: Hensher.

152.

‘I’ve

153.

Beckford to Courtenay: Haggerty, 147-8.

Church to Ned: McCormick, 261-2.
153.

Barlow to Lister: Lister, No Priest^ 116.

154. Merrill to Carpenter: quoted by N. Greig, in Carpenter (1984), 41.

Gosse at Browning’s funeral: Pearsall, 452.

[295]

Notes
154.
154.

Margaret Fuller: Katz (1976), 466.
‘sphinxes of conformity’: Gide to R. Fernandez, 1934: Courouve
(1985), 166.

154.

‘adhesive love’: a phrenological concept: Whitman, Democratic Vistas
(1871), para. Ill, note 2; also Stern, 105.

155.

‘teachers of future society’: Carpenter, The Intermediate Sex,

1.

157.

157.

6.

Society of Strangers

20 per cent of all prostitutes: Prime-Stevenson (1908), ch. 6.
157.

20 per cent and 25 per cent of the total: Moll, 309; Chevalier, 233;

Prime-Stevenson (1908), ch. 6; Ruling, also in Blasius-Phelan, 149;
see also Elisabeth Dauthendy, mJfsZ, VIII (1906), 285-300;
158.

Zimmerman.

158.

koshki: Healey, 53.

157.

lesbian prostitution in Paris: Chevalier, 236-7; Corbin, 214; Taxil,

159.
158.
159.

263.

‘blackmailing by bath-servants’: Tarnovsky, 146.

Bains de Penthievre: M. Sibalis, in Higgs, 25.
St Petersburg bathhouses and Kuzmin’s visit: Healey, 34.
158.
159.
159.

Holborn and Saffron Hill: Norton (1992), 72.
‘every fifth man is an invert’: Ellis, 352.

‘meridian of Kansas City’: ‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 6.
particular spots: Delcourt, 285-9; Aries-Duby, 588; Citron, I, 381-2;

Coward, 239; Fournier- Verneuil, 281, 314 and 337; Merrick, 288;

M. Sibalis, in Higgs, 16-17; McCormick, 356; Wilde, An Ideal
Husband, II.

groups in Sweden: Rydstrom, and thesis: ‘Sinners and Citizens:
Bestiality and Homosexuality in Sweden,

1880-1950’ (U. of

Stockholm).
159.

‘Beware of Sods!’: Anon. (1850), 405.

159. Victor Hugo: Ashbee (1879), 407-10.
159.

Sydney: Norton (1997), 259-60; also Ellis, 185.

159.

Sydney Gazette: M. Smith, ‘Australia’s Gay Heritage’, in Bob Hay,

‘The Sodomites’ Guide to Colonial Sydney’: http://

members.ozemail.com.au/~vombatus
160. Mile Raucourt: e.g. Coward, 246. See also Stambolian-Marks,

359-60.

[296]

Notes
160.

poems on actresses: Robb (1993), 178-82.

160.

lesbian apartment blocks: Chevalier, 237.

160.

lesbian cafes: Frey, 37^5; Taxil; etc.

160.

‘One would have thought’: Mendes (1890), 493.

161.

Louise Taillandier: Zola (1880), 205-6.

161.
163.
161.
163.

lesbian brothel at Asnieres: Goncourt, II, 741.

163.

Lorrain (1922), 176; Porter-Weeks, 32.

London guardsmen: Ackerley, 174-5; Leeves, 27-29 April 1850; also
Ernest Thickbroom: Weeks (1989), 113.

164.

‘On leaving the urinal’: September 1872: Arthur Rimbaud, no. 54.
‘unmarried toughs’: ‘Earl Lind’ (1918), 63.

163.

‘O you are such

165.
164.
165.

‘going into politics’: Chevalier, 185.

.

fruits of sodomy:

.

.’:

‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 134-5.

Canler, 126; Mace, 169.

164.
165.

a ‘petit jesus’ from Lyon:

165.

Armory Hall: Chauncey (1994), 37; Katz (1976), 57d-5.

Poznansky, 21.

Rev. Charles Parkhurst: Katz (1976), 40.
‘brownies’: J. Kiernan (1916), in Chauncey (1982-3), 142; ‘Earl Lind’

(1922), 89.
166.
166.

166.

Paresis Hall: ‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 146 ff.; also Katz (1976), 47 and

Chauncey (1994), 34. On commercial exploitation in US cities, see
also Lydston (1892), in Nye, 153.

165.

A bar in Amsterdam: G. Hekma, in Higgs, 70.

167.
166.

‘Everyone behaved ceremoniously’: Strindberg (1891), 12; see also

167.

Strindberg (1885).

Temperance Hall: Cocks, 90-2.

A group of Frenchmen: Carlier, 442-3.
168.
168.
166.
168.
167.

Eagle Street College: C. White, 218.
‘Hafiz Tavern’: Malmstad-Bogomolov, 103-5.

The ‘Lohengrin’: Hirschfeld (1905), 53.
Some clubs hid: O. de Joux, in Muller, 80.
homosexual marriages: e.g. Carlier, 349-50 and 457; Ellis, 250;

Norton (1992), 199.
167.
168.

‘taking the sacrament’: Lister, / Know, 160.

‘simple little devils’: Rolfe (1974) and introduction.

Copenhagen in 1815: W. von Rosen, in Gerard-Hekma, 198-9.
‘Order of Chaeronea’: Stokes; Conner, 257; Weeks (1977), 118.
Blue Grotto, Capri: Gregorovius, 756-8.
168. Adelsward Eersen: Beurdeley, 211-13; Ogrinc.

[297]

Notes
168.
168.

168.

‘ambition and hostility’: J. Steakley, in Gerard-Hekma, 168.

Neuschwanstein: e.g. Fernandez, 49-54.
Elisar von Kupffer: e.g. Haas, III,

168.

3.

American hobo subculture: F. Willard, in Ellis, 360-7; Rev. F. C.
Laubach, in Chauncey (1994), 397 n. 56.

168.
169.
169.

language of tattoos: Lacassagne, ‘Tatouage’, 124-5; also Kurella, 112.
blacks and whites: Katz (1976), 49, on a ‘miscegenation dance’ in

Saint Louis.
170.
‘a

comrade in tastes’: Malmstad-Bogomolov, 145.

169.

Cambridge ‘Apostles’: e.g. Dickinson; Felix; Furbank; Skidelsky.

170.
171.

‘Martyr of prejudice’: Crompton (1985), 126.

171.

‘Men of this breed’: Quoted by R. Lewinsohn: Rivers, 170.

170.

Engels to Marx: Manchester, 22 June 1869: Muller, 57.

171.

club in the Crenelle area, and letter: Carlier, 447.

172.

Solomon at the Bourse: W. A. Peniston, in Merrick-Ragan, 134.

172.

dead outside a Venice hotel: ‘In Memoriam’, in Akademos: Ogrinc.

171.

‘travelling international celebrities’: Moll, 148.

171.

large numbers of Uranians: Krafft-Ebing, 267 and 288.

172.

‘The Furnace’: Hyam, 128-31; C. White, 328-30 and 339-40.

175.

‘Stable Boy of Park Lane’: Felix, 108.

‘Saturday night Mike Ellis’: Norton (1999).
176.

7.

177.
175.
176.

A Sex of One’s Own

Lister insuring her life: Lister, I Know, 309.

‘Children of Sodom’: Cunther (1995).
‘Societe des Emiles’: Courouve (1871).

La Philosophic dans le boudoir: Sade (1795), ‘Troisieme Dialogue’.
176.

‘analysis of murder’: Blasius-Phelan, 48.

176.

‘Sodomy violates

177.

Thomas Aquinas: Summa theologica, 2.2.154 (‘unnatural vice’

.

.

.’:

Lariviere (1998), 96.

compared to adultery, seduction and rape).
177.

‘Sodomy simplified’: Crompton (1985), 126.
‘Discourse on the Manners’: Notopoulos, 404-13.

177.

Byron’s choice of companions: Shelley, II, 58 (to Peacock, Naples,

December 1818).
Jeremy Bentham: Bentham; also Crompton (1985), 20 ff.
did work appear’: Crompton (1985), 255 Quly 1816).
178. ‘Never

177.

[.

.

.]

[298]

Notes
178.

Burke twice sued newspapers: Crompton (1985), 32-3; Mavor, 136.
178.

‘exquisite pleasure’: Smollett, ch. 51; see also chs 34-35.

178.

German writers: G. Hekma, in Gerard-Hekma, 437; Norton (1997),
172; Derks, 79. E.g. J. G. Hamann, Sokratische Denkwiirdigkeiten
(1750), J. M. Gesner, Socrates Sancta Paederasta (1769), Herder, ‘Ueber
die Schaamhaftigkeit Virgils’ (1769).

179.

Riom prison: Perrot, 288.

180.

‘He openly confessed’: Carlier, 302; also Hirschfeld (1905), 115;

Huysmans, Ld-bas (1891), ch. 12; Taxil, 264.
180.
180.

clean up the Champs-Elysees: Ashbee (1879), 407-10.
^tapette^:

Courouve (1985), 212. Cf. later adoptions: ‘schwul’, ‘queer’,

etc.

180.
183.
180.

181.
181.
184.
181.
184.

^chevaliers de la manchette': e.g. Lariviere

(1998) (‘Ai-Ti’); Littre

(‘Manchette’); Rousseau, Les Confessions, I, 2.
^spartiate':

Fourier, 212; Sade (1791), 281.

‘Believe me
‘like

.

.

.’:

Casper (1863).

crabs to slow cooking’: Ara spei (1865); Kennedy, 81.

Ulrichs at Congress of German Jurists: Gladius furens (1868).

copulating male dogs: Gide (1924), 95-6.
183. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung: Schopenhauer, 620 and 643-51.
185.
184.
185.

Ulrichs in L’Aquila: On Ulrichs today: www.angelfire.com/fl3/

celebration2000
‘sport obscene’: Anon. (1866), 7.

‘Why, I wish to know’: Summers, 688.
186.
184.
186.
185.

‘We ought to think’: H. Kennedy, in Rosario, 32.
‘middle-class England’: Ellis, 64.
‘smaller number of inverts in Spain’: Maranon, 176.

every third male servant: Joux, 193.
185.

inverts were musicians: Calesia (1900), in Ellis, 295; see also

Kraepelin, 781.
186.

‘psychiatric proverb’: Prime-Stevenson {c. 1908), 76.

4 per cent of adult male population: David, ix.
Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare Komitee: e.g. Haas; Hirschfeld;
(1899, etc.); Muller, 300 ff.; Steakley; Wolff.
188.

French petition: Ellmann, 463; Fernandez, 81; Goncourt, III, 1199;
Lucien, 78.

188.

British petition: Ellmann, 463; Hyde (1973), 291-2.

189.

Community of the Special: J. Jones, 97-8; Muller, 306-9.

189.

Benedict Friedlander: in Blasius-Phelan, 152-61.

[2991

Notes
192.
190.

‘ghastly “Committee”
To C. M. von Weber, Munich, 4 July 1920.
Henry Gerber: Chauncey (1994), 144.

192.

Johanna Elberskirchen: Haas, IV, 2.

192.

Anna Ruling: ed. Faderman and Eriksson; see Blasius-Phelan, 143 If.

192.

the suffrage movement: Tickner, 222-3.

192.

‘cheap physical expression’: ‘Eugenics and Spiritual Parenthood’
(1911), in C. White, 115.

192.

Stella Browne: Blasius-Phelan,

193.

‘In a Spanish prison’: Ellis, 209.

193.

Eulenburg trials: Haas, III, 1; also Grand-Carteret; Rivers, 188 ff.

186 ff.

French reaction: Mirbeau.
193.

cause of First World War: Baumont.

194.

studies on suicide, 1978-2000: the 1989 report that revealed an

epidemic of gay teen suicides was widely publicized partly because
it

was so easy to discredit. For a summary of studies:

www.sws.soton.ac.uk/gay-youth-suicide/04-gay-bisexual-suicidestudies.htm
200.
200.
8.

198.

Fairy Tales

basis of all human society: Bliiher, 166.

201. Christian Cantle: Woods, 13; The Return of the Native, I, 3 and III, 7.
‘insane or sickly deviance’: Sand (1971), II, 125-6 (TV, ch. 13).

200. ‘Milord Link is a Bishop of ClogheT'. Stendhal (1968-74), IX, 318:
Lucien Leuwen, IV,

1;

Thompson; also J.-J. Labia’s introduction to

Stendhal (1994).
200. ‘Monsieur is siding with Collin’: Balzac, III, 222.
202.
201. Diderot and possible proclivities: Faderman (1981), 44.
‘I

trembled as I kissed your arm’: Sand (1833), 189.

201. Eric, or Little by Little: Chandos, 298-9; Hyde (1970), 112-14
{Saturday Review).

202. in other countries: e.g. the novels by Adolphe Belot (p. 203), Louis

Couperus (p. 210), Georges Eekhoud (p. 209) and Adolf von
Vdlbrandt: Fridolin'’s Mystical Marriage (1875; New York, 1884), based

on the theories of Ulrichs.
French armed forces: e.g. Darien; Descaves; Hermant; see also Gury,
87. Others: Diraison-Seylor, Les Maritimes, moeurs candides (s.d.);

Jean Bosco, Le Vice marin (1905), in Millward, 166-7; Gury, 87.

[300]

Notes
202. Alice Mitchell (Memphis, 1892): Dubariy (1906), 151; Ellis, 201;
203.
203.

Eskridge, 20; Eaderman (1981), 291 and (1994), 139.

Sappho as lover of a man: Robb (1993), 172 and 176.
Goethe’s ‘An den Mond’: Derks, 479-81; 7/j-Z, II (1900), 67.

203.

City Crimes'. Woods, 152-3.

203. Sodom in Union Square: Katz (1976), 574 n. 40.

203. ‘Cease to hide this book’: from translation by ‘A. D.’ (Chicago, 1891),
204.
12-13.
204.

A Marriage Below Zero: Gifford, 27; Mitchell-Leavitt, 196.
‘you have to concentrate very hard’: Larousse, XI, 473.

204. Les Intrigues de Moliere: Livet.
204.

‘documentary and anecdotal’: H. de Weindel and E R Fischer,
UHomosexualite en Allemagne (Juven, 1908): Rivers, 128.

205. ‘Such books’: Rolfe (1974), 25-6 and 48.
207.
205. Weiberbeute: Hirschfeld, Die Transvestiten (1910); Foster, 221.
206. Josephin Peladan: La Gynandre (1891) and Birkett, 153, 317, etc.

drawn up by the German police: Muller, 289.

206.

lists

207.

The Power of Mesmerism: Summers.

209. Die Paderasten: Muller, 289.
207. lesbian novels by the ton: Dr Irving C. Rosse, in Katz (1976), 72.

207. vampirical women: see Dyer.
207.

Dr Hippolyte Homo: Corbin, 187.

208.
211.

The Sins of the Cities: on Jack Saul, see Kaplan.

209. 75 per cent of homosexual men and women: Hirschfeld (1914), 395.
Escal-Vigor: Eekhoud (1899); Lucien, 116.

209. series on ‘nameless love’: J. Jones, 272; Popp, 32-40.
210. In La Maison de la vieille: Mendes (1894), 398.
210.

The Prussian Offcer: Woods, 222.

211.

‘gay lives represented as tragic’: Toibm, 28.
elegies of English literature: e.g. Crompton (1985), 187; Woods,
ch. 9.

211. In Memoriam and The Times: Crompton (1985), 190; Reade, 9;

Spencer, 260.
212. Charlus’s military hospital: Proust, IV, 387. On ‘lovely war’: e.g.

Porter-Weeks, 78.
213. Kenilworth: Anon. (1866), 68.
213.

^Che bardacherai mon bain afec doiV: Murphy, ed., 148 n. 88.

213.

private connotations: e.g. Mann, 39.

213.

Heine proposed ^ghaselig’: Derks, 554; also Bumm, 254.

[301]

^

Notes

213.
‘arse-in-the-air’ sonnet: Huysmans, ch. 14.

213. stable lads and grooms: e.g. Roger de Beauvoir’s ‘David Dick’, the

groom who wears rouge (Beauvoir, II, 127-65); Balzac’s lads (Robb
214.

(1994), 260-1); Lorrain’s ‘bougres d’ecuries’ (Winn, 102-3).

214. ‘continual, convulsive contraction’: Lombroso, 402 and fig. 8.

Woolf’s Julia Craye: Woolf, 104-5.
214. Gide reads Lara\ Jouinal, 18 February 1888; Pollard, 268.
214.

‘Christopher Columbus of modern love’: Rachilde, 94.

215.

Cyril and Lionel. Arch Smith, 30-1.

215. Winthrop, Taylor and Wister: excerpts in Mitchell-Leavitt.
216. these pioneer idylls: e.g. Winifred Mercier writing to ‘Donald’ about
‘the great wide west’, ‘where perhaps there might be more chance

217.

of finding out what manner of being you were’ (Vicinus, 205).

216.

Charles Warren Stoddard: Higgs, 168; Katz (1976), 501;

218. Mitchell-Leavitt, 69; also Austen.
218. ‘deeds that are too revolting to relate’: Katz (1976), 33.
217.

The Wind in the Willows: see also Mitchell-Leavitt, 296.
217. Robin’s aggressive flirting: Pyle, 114 and 325.
218.

‘The holy friar’: Pyle, 315.

219. ‘wholly serious defence’: B. A. Inman, in Dowling, 111.

‘The Greeks who worshipped’: ‘The Problem of the Face’, Cottam
(1930), 39.

218. ‘In trousers now’: Rondeaux of Boyhood by ‘A. Newman’ (1923): Arch

Smith, 165.
219.

219.

‘Smart-looking lads’: ‘Your City Cousins’, Nicholson.

Cottam (1930), 78.

‘I

sat in the rector’s study’:

‘I

meet a young man’: Cottam (1900), 181.

220. Jenny Lind wrote to a friend: Prince, 222.

long for you’: Prince, 166.

220.

‘I

221.

‘The Grand Eunuch’: Prince, 195.

222.

‘it reminds me of old Socrates’: Wullschlager, 424; also Mayer, 227.
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde: Showalter, 107 ff.

224.

225. ‘infernal art of deceiving’: Custine (1971), 67.
225.

Thom Gunn and Colm Toibm: Toibm, 231-2.

226. Whitman’s Leaves of Grass: Ellis, 339.

226. ‘Out of the Sun’: Her Enemy, Some Friends - and Other Personages:
Stories

& Studies Mostly of Human Hearts (Elorence, 1913): see

Mitchell-Leavitt.

226. ‘my Burne-Jones drawings’: Wilde (2000), 713.

[302]

.

Notes
226. Montesquieu’s interior: Goncourt, III, 604.

211

battle over Shakespeare’s sonnets: e.g. BarnstorfF; Crompton (1985),

227.

Shakespeare, 117; Wilde (1889); Woods, 72.

5-6, 189 and 327-8; Harris (1909); Rau, 203 (also Schonholzer);

227. Hugo’s ‘Olympio’: Luppe, 191 (27 August 1837); Proust, II, 437-8.
‘lover-wise’ and Maggie Tulliver: 2

and 18 January 1881: P. Johnson,

228.

in Lesbian History Group, 67-71.

227.

Charlus and Musset’s poems: Proust, IV, 178 and 489; also II, 747.

228. Tchaikovsky’s sexuality audibly encoded: Maurice, ch. 32; Imre, 111.

228.

Schubert’s friend: Newbould, 179.
Ludwig II and Brunhilda: Carpenter (1902), ch. 5 (2 November

229.
229.
229.

Jenny Lind as icon: Andersen (see p. 220); Symonds (1984), 135;

1865).

‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 94. Also Marie- Antoinette: Saint-Paul, 88;

Fernandez, 52 and 68.
‘storiettes’ in lavatories: Aronson, 22.

230. obscene graffiti: Symonds
(1984), 187-8.
229.

‘We two alone’: ‘Dans ce cafe bonde d’imbeciles

.

.

.’

(1891): Verlaine

(1985).

229. ‘There is a thicket’: Carlier, 287.
230. ‘Homosexuals have time for everybody’: Crisp, 45.
‘the love of the impossible’:

Symonds (1984), 188.

230.

‘But who could describe my terror’: Krafft-Ebing, 243.

231.

‘You’re right there!’: Colette, 449.

232.

‘opens a window’: Engelstein, 388; Malmstad-Bogomolov, 95.

232.

Loom of Youth: e.g. Porter-Weeks, 49.
Rossetti and Hardy compared to Hall: Faderman (1981), 172; Hall,

232.

316.

9.

233.

Gentle Jesus

‘thousands’ of homosexuals: Hirschfeld (1914), 537.

234. Bishop of London: Davenport-Hines, 101.
234. Philo of Alexandria: D. Bailey, 22.
235. Lucian, Dialogues of the Courtesans: tr. M. D. Macleod.
235. Secret Gospel: Smith (with photographs of ms); also Ehrman, 131-2.
235.
236.

House of Bishops: J. John, 12-23.
Humphry Woolrych: ‘Sodomy and Bestiality’, in C. White, 28-9.

[303]

Notes
237.

‘O God and Father’: Scholz, in Miiller, 237.
237. ‘He wished Christianity’: Forster, Maurice, 68; see John 20:2; 21:7

and 20.

W. K. Clifford: Carpenter (1916), ch. 3.
238. A. E. Forrest: Hyam, 104.

237.

239. ‘In Genesis and Judges’*: Genesis 18-19:28; Judges 19.
239.

Sodom is not, according to one \dew: e.g. Prime-Stevenson (1908),
43-4. Same and similar texts quoted by Bentham and D. Bailey. See
also Boswell, 93

ff; J.

John, 15; ‘Homosexualitat und Bibel’ (‘by a

Catholic priest’), 7/jZ, IV (1902), 199-244.
239.

‘According to Ezekiel

.

.

.

Book of Wisdom’: Ezekiel 16:49; Book of

Wisdom 19:13.
239. Clement and Basilides: Clement, Miscellanies, III, 1,1.
241.
239. subtle or tenuous historical arguments: e.g. Smith; T. Horner, ‘Jesus’,
in Dynes et al. See Luke 7:1-10; Matthew 8:5-13.

242. ‘Jesus made no such blunders’: ‘Earl Lind’ (1922), 15.
240.
241.

Christopher Marlowe: Richard Baines, in Norton (1992), 20.
medieval literature and iconography: Boswell, 105.

241. Essai sur la peinture: Diderot,

1

143-4.

242. Frederick the Great: Lariviere (1997), 148-9.
244. Stendhal: Del Litto,
272; Merimee,
(1850).

HB

242.

Bentham and the Monthly Magazine: Crompton (1985), 280-2.

242. ‘Children of Sodom’: Gunther (1995).
243. Bordel apostolique: Courouve (1999).
243.

Sade and temple at Jerusalem: Sade (1795), ‘Troisieme Dialogue’.

244.

Rosa Bonheur: Cooper, 49.

247. Zinzendorf: Busst, 7.
244. Gladstone and ‘shameless lusts’: Dowling, 78.
245. Lorrain and hermaphroditic Cupid: ‘Sur un Dieu mort’, in Buveurs
248.
dines
Birkett, 198-9.

Christian imitation’: Proudhon, 382.

245.

‘a

246.

‘The sacred and tender love’: Raffalovich, 30; see also Faber.

246.

Max Jacob’s vision of Christ: La Defense de Tartujfe (1919).

247. Hopkins’ sermon of 1879: Hopkins (1967), 35-6; N. White, 317.
‘evil

thoughts’ and ‘in the wrong way’: N. White, 114.

247. Hadrian the Seventh: Rolfe (1904), 177-8.
248.

Samuel Cottam: Cottam (1960), 68 n.; Arch Smith, 175.
‘R. S.’: Ellis, 114.

[304]

Notes
248. Vivid attraction’ and Judas as lover: Prime-Stevenson (1908), 82 and
250.
258; Arch Smith, 175.
250.
eternal anonymity: Crisp, 150.

‘muscular Christianity’: Hughes (1879 and 1894); Dowling, 44.
250. anticlerical ideologues: Zola (1898), 228, 382, 433; George Moore,

Mike Fletcher (1889), in Birkett, 36; Mendes (1890), 46-7; Rimbaud,
‘L’air leger et charmant de la Galilee

.

.

.’

and ‘Les Premieres

communions’; Paul Scheerbart, Tarub. Bagdads beriihmte Kbchin.
Arabischer KultWToman (1897), in J. Jones, 291 n. 3; see also G.

Rousseau on Richard Payne Knight, in Rousseau-Porter, 108-9.
250. People of the Moonlight: Blasius-Phelan, 205-13.
251.
250.
251.
252.

The figure of the androgyne: Busst, 10.
‘Suffer little children’: E. Rouzier, in Le Journal, 26 October 1900:

Arch Smith, 48.
Ralph Adams Cram: Shand-Tucci.

251.

Duncan Grant: Watney, 70-72.

252. Rimbaldian God: Verlaine, Sagesse, II,

1.

Emily Dickinson to Sue Gilbert: Late April 1852: Faderman (1994),
49.

259.

10.

Heroes of Modern Life

254.

‘primitive’ cultures: See note on North American Indians on p. 290.

257.

Carson cross-examines Wilde: Holland, 155-6, 124.

257.

‘The jurymen’: Hyde (1973), 124.
‘Beefsteak Pete’ et ah: Duberman (1997), 223-30.

259.

‘Palmo’s in Broadway’: Melville (1982), 301.

259.

‘Greenhorn’: Woods, 153.

260.

‘introspective and pallid dreamer’: Doyle (1981), 547.

261.

‘hurried to a consulting-room’: ‘A Medical Document’.

261.

disgraced Oscar Wilde: Doyle (1989), 79-80.

261.

Doyle on Dorian Gray: Doyle (1989), 79.

261. dinner with Wilde at the Langham: Doyle (1989), 79.
261.

‘dining with a school-master!’: Booth, 342.

262.

‘The Snob Queers’: Ellmann, 402.

264.

‘no longer interested in women’: Booth, 244.

265. Vere Street:
266.

A different Vere Street: Clare Market, not Oxford Street.

‘Ah, mon ami^: The Lost Mine (1925).

[305]

X

266.
267.

267.

Notes

‘colourless shrimp’: Murder Must Advertise (1933).
Lone Ranger and Tonto: Rothel, 58.
homosexual Batman devotees: Wertham, 190-2.

268. ‘Because of my innate appetencies’: ‘Earl Lind’ (1922), d— 5.

268.

Comparable remarks in Sennett.
Hoover and ‘depraved human beings’: ‘How Safe is Your Daughter?’,
American Magazine, ]u\y 1947: in Eskridge, 60.

268.

Woran erkennt man Homosexuelle?: By Raphael Eugen Kirchner (Wald,
1908): Muller, 318.

269. ‘Mystery and Detective Eiction’: J. B. Levin, in Dynes et al.

[306]

Works Cited

(Unless otherwise indicated, the place of publication is London, New York
or Paris.)

My Father and Myself (1968). Intro. W. H. Auden (1969).
New York Review Books, 1999.

Ackerley, J. R.

Acton, William. The Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive Organs in
Youths in Adult Age, and in Advanced Life. Churchill, 1857.

Adler, Alfred. Das Problem der Homosexualitdt: erotisches Training und erotischer
Riickzug. 1917; Leipzig: Hirzel, 1930.

Aldrich, Robert and G. Wotherspoon, eds. Who’s

Who in Gay and Lesbian

History from Antiquity to World War II. Routledge, 2001.
Allen, Clifford.

A Textbook ofPsychosexual Disorders. 2nd ed. Oxford UP, 1969.

Alpers, Antony. The Life of Katherine Mansfield. 1980; Oxford UP, 1982.

Anon. Yokel’s Preceptor, or More Sprees in London! being a regular and Curious

Show-Up of all the Rigs and Doings of the Flash Cribs in this Great Metropolis
[etc.].

Dugdale, c. 1850.

Anon. Don Leon: a Poem by Lord Byron [.

.

.]

forming part of the private journal

of His Lordship. 1866?; Fortune Press [1934].

Anon. Boy-Worship. Oxford, 1880.
Anon. Teleny. 1893; ed. J. McRae. GMP, 1986.

Arch Smith, Timothy d’. Love in Earnest: Some Notes on the Lives and Writings
of English Hranian’ Poets from- 1889 to 1930. Routledge

& Kegan Paul,

1970.
Argis, Henri d’. Sodome. Piaget, 1888.
Aries, Philippe and Georges Duby, gen. eds. Histoire de la vie prive'e. IV. De
la Revolution a la

Grande Guerre. Seuil, 1987.

[307]

Works Cited
Aronson, Theo. Prince Eddy and the Homosexual Underworld. John Murray,
1994.

Arthur Rimbaud. Paul Verlaine. Manuscrits et lettres autographes. [.

.

.] Succession

Jean Hugues. Drouot, March 1998.
Ashbee, Henry Spencer (‘Pisanus Fraxi’). Index librorum pjvhibitorum: being
Notes Bio- Biblio- Icono-graphical and Critical, on Curious and Uncommon
Books. Privately printed, 1877.

Ashbee, H. S. Centuria librorum absconditorum [etc.]. Privately printed, 1879.
Askwith, Betty. Two Victorian Families. Chatto & Windus, 1971.
Austen, Roger. Playing the Game. The Homosexual Novel in America. BobbsMerrill, 1977.

Bailey,

Derrick Sherwin. Homosexuality and the Western Christian Tradition.

Longmans, 1955; Hamden Coun., 1975.
Bailey, Paul. Three Queer Lives.

An Alternative Biography of Fred Barnes, Naomi

Jacob and Anhur Marshall. Hamish Hamilton, 2001.
Ball,

Benjamin. La Folk erotique. Bailliere, 1888.

Balzac,

H.

de.

La Comedie Humaine.

12 vols. Ed. P.-G. Castex. Pleiade,

1976-81.
Bancroft, Hubert Howe. The Native Races of the Pacific States ofNorth America.
I.

Wild Tribes. Appleton, 1875.

Barbey d’Aurevilly, Jules. Du dandysme et de Georges Brummell. Caen, 1845;

2nd ed. Lemerre [1879].
Barney, Natalie Clifford. Souvenirs indiscrets. Flammarion, 1960.
Barnstorff,

D. A Key to Shakespeare's Sonnets. Tr. T. J. Graham. Tnibner,

1862.
Bartlett, Neil.

Who Was That Man? A Present for Mr. Oscar Wilde. 1988;

Penguin, 1993.
Baudelaire,

Charles.

Oeuvres completes. 1 vols. Ed. C. Pichois. Pleiade,

1975-6.

Baumont, Maurice. LAjfaire Eulenburg et les origines de la guerre mondiale.
Payot, 1933.

Beard, George Miller. La Neurasthenie sexuelle: hygiene, causes, symptomes et
traitement.

New York, 1884; 3rd ed. 1894. Tr. P. Rodet: Societe d’edi-

tions scientifiques, 1895.

Beaude, Jean-Pierre. Dictionnaire de medecine usuelle. 2 vols. Didier, 1849.
Beauvoir, Roger de. Histoires cavalieres. 2 vols. Brussels: Hauman, 1838.

Beckford, William. Vathek. Ed. R. Lonsdale. Oxford UP, 1983.

Works Cited
Belot, Adolphe. Mademoiselle Giraud, ma femme. Pref. E. Zola. 1870; Mademoiselle

Giraud, My Wife. Tr. A. D. Chicago: Laird

& Lee, 1891.

Benson, Arthur Christopher. Memoirs of Arthur Hamilton, B.A., of Trinity
College,

Cambridge [.

.

.].

Kegan Paul & Co., 1886.

Bentham, Jeremy. ‘Offences Against One’s Self. Ed. L. Crompton. Journal
of Homosexuality, III, 4 (1978) and IV,

1

(1978).

Berkman, Alexander. Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist. 2nd ed. Mother Earth,
1920.

Bernheim, Hippolyte. Hypnotisme, suggestion, psychoth&apie. Doin, 1891.
Beurdeley, Cecile.

HAmour bleu. Tr. M. Taylor. Cologne: Benedikt Taschen,

1994.
Birkett, Jennifer.

The Sins of the Fathers. Decadence in France 1810-1914.

Quartet Books, 1986.
Bland, Lucy and L. Doan, eds. Sexology Uncensored. The Documents of Sexual
Science. Polity Press, 1998.

Blasius, Mark and S. Phelan, eds.

We Are Everywhere. A Historical Sourcebook

of Gay and Lesbian Politics. Routledge, 1997.
Bleys,

Rudi C. The Geography of Perversion: Male-to-Male Sexual Behaviour

Outside the West and the Ethnographic Imagination. Cassell, 1996.

Bloch, Ivan. Sexual Life in England Past and Present. Tr. 1938; Royston:
Oracle, 1996.
Bltiher, Hans. Die Rolle der Erotik in der mannlichen Gesellschaft.

Eine Theorie

der menschlichen Staatsbildung nach Wesen und Wert. Jena, 1917; ed. H.J.

Schoeps. Stuttgart: Klett, 1962.

Blyth, James.

Edward Fitzgerald and Tosh\

'herring merchants^

[.

.

.].

John

Long, 1908.
Boddy, Gillian. Katherine Mansfield, the

Woman and the Writer. Penguin,

1988.

Booth, Martin. The Doctor, the Detective and Arthur Conan Doyle: A Biography
of Arthur Conan Doyle. Hodder

& Stoughton, 1997.

Boswell, John. Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality.

Gay People in

Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Fourteenth
Century. Chicago UP, 1980.

Botting, Douglas. Alexander von Humboldt: Biographie eines grossen Forschungsreisenden. 1973. Tr. A. Hohenemser. Prestel, 1989.

Bradford,

Edwin Emmanuel. The New Chivalry, and Other Poems. Kegan

Paul & Co., 1918.

Bremmer, Jan, ed. From Sappho to De Sade. Moments in the History of Sexuality.
Routledge, 1989; 1991.

[309]

Works Cited
Briere de Boismont, Alexandre.

De la folk raisonnante et de Vimportance du

ddire des actes: pour le diagnostic et la medecine legale. Bailliere, 1867.

Broughton, Rhoda. Dear Faustina. Leipzig: Tauchnitz; London: Bentley,
1897.

Bullough, Vern. Homosexuality: A History. New American Library, 1979.

Bumm, Peter. August Graf von Platen. Fine Biographie. Schoningh, 1990.
Burton, Richard. ‘Terminal Essay’. The Book of the Thousand Nights and a
Night. 1 vols. Privately printed, 1885.

Bush, Russell. Ajfectionate Men: A Photogp'aphic History of a Century of Male
Couples,

1850s to 1950s. St Martin’s, 1998.

Busst, A. J. L.

‘The Image of the Androgyne in the 19th Century’. In Ian

Fletcher, ed. Romantic Mythologies. Routledge

& Kegan Paul, 1967.

Cabanis, Georges. Rapports du physique et du moral (1802). In Oeuvres philosophiques. I. Ed. C. Lehec and J. Cazeneuve. PUF, 1956.

Canler, Louis. Memoires. 2 vols. Roy, 1882.
Carlier, Fran9ois. Etudes de pathologie sociale. Les Deux prostitutions.

Dentu,

1887.

Carpenter, Edward. Lovers Coming of Age (1896; 1902; enlarged ed., 1906,

with Homogenic Love); loldus: An Anthology of Friendship (1902; enlarged
ed., 1906);
tive Folk:

(1916):

The Intermediate Sex (1908); Intermediate Types Among Primi-

A Study in Social Evolution (1911; 1914); My Days and Dreams
Simon Dawson.Com, ‘The Edward Carpenter Archive’

see

<http://www. simondsn. dircon.co.uk/ecindex.htm>; also ‘People with
a

History:

An Online Guide to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans

History’, ed. Paul Halsall, 1997 <http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/pwh/

index-eur Lhtml>
Carpenter, E. Selected Writings. I. Sex. Ed. N. Greig. GMP, 1984.

Casanova, Giacomo. Memoires. Ed. R. Abirached and E. Zorzi.

3

vols.

Pleiade, 1958-60.

Casper, Johann Ludwig. Practisches Handbuch der gerichtlichen Medicin. 1858;
5th ed., rev. Carl Liman. 2 vols. Berlin: Hirschwald, 1871; 7th ed. 1881.
Traite pratique de medecine legale, redige d^aprh des observations personnelles.
2 vols. Tr.

G.

Bailliere. Bailliere,

1883.

A Handbook of the Practice of

Forensic Medicine, Based Upon Personal Experience. 4 vols. Tr. G.

Balfour. The

W.

New Sydenham Society, 1865.

Casper, J. L. Klinische Novellen zur gerichtlichen Medicin. Berlin: Hirschwald,
1863.

[310]

Works Cited
Castle, Terry.

The Apparitional Lesbian: Female Homosexuality and Modern

Culture. Columbia UP, 1993.

Catlin, George. Letters and Notes on the Manners., Customs, and Conditions of the

North American Indians, Written during Eight Years^ Travel (1832-1839)
amongst the Wildest Tribes of Indians in North America. 1844; Dover, 1973.
Cavafy, C.

P.

Collected Poems. Tr.

E. Keeley and

P.

Sherrard. Chatto

&

Windus, 1990.
Chandos, John. Boys Together. English Public Schools 1800-1864. 1984; Oxford

UP, 1985.
Charcot, Jean-Martin and V. Magnan. ‘Inversions du sens genital’. Archives
de

January-February 1882.

Chateaubriand, Fran^ois-Rene de. Memoires d^outre-tombe.

2 vols.

Ed. M.

Levaillant and G. Moulinier. Pleiade, 1951.

Chauncey, George. ‘From Sexual Inversion to Homosexuality: Medicine and
the Changing Conceptualization of Female Deviance’. Salmagundi, 58-9

(1982-3), 114-46.

Chauncey, G. Gay New York. The Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940.
1994; Flamingo, 1995.
Chester, Lewis, D. Leitch and C. Simpson. The Cleveland Street Affair.

Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1976.
Chevalier, Julien.

Une maladie de la personnalite: Vinversion sexuelle; psycho-

physiologie; sociologie; teratologie.

Pref. A. Lacassagne. S torch;

Masson,

1893.
Christian, J. ‘Onanisme’. Dictionnaire encyclopedique des sciences medicales. 2nd
series (1869-89), XV,

359-85.

Citron, Pierre. La Poe'sie de Paris dans la litterature frangaise. 2 vols. Editions

de Minuit, 1961.

Cocks, Harry. Abominable Crimes: Sodomy Trials in English Law and Culture,

1830-1889. PhD thesis, Manchester, 1998.

Cohen, Vyulliam A. Sex Scandal: The Private Parts of Victorian Fiction. Duke,
1996.
Colette. Oeuvres. Ed. C. Pichois. I. Pleiade, 1984.

Colin, Henri. Essai sur Vetat mental des hysteriques. Pref. J. Charcot. Rueff,

1890.

Conner, Randy P. et al. CasselVs Encyclopedia of Queer Myth, Symbol, and Spirit.
Cassell, 1997.

Cooper, Emmanuel. The Sexual Perspective. Homosexuality and Art in the Last

100 Years in the West. 1986; Routledge, 1994.

Works Cited
Corbin, Alain. Les Filles de noce. Misere sexuelle et prostitution (19^ sikle). 1978;

Flammarion, 1982.
Cory, William (Johnson). lonica. 1858; ed. A. C. Benson. George Allen,
1905.

Cottam, Samuel E. New Sermons for a New Century. Skeffington, 1900.
Cottam, S. E. Cameos of Boyhood and Other Poems. Stockwell [1930].
Cottam, S. E. Friends of My Fancy, and Other Poems. Eton: The Shakespeare

Head Press, 1960.
Couperus, Louis. Noodlot, 1890. Tr. C. Bell. Footsteps of Fate. A Novel. Heine-

mann, 1891.
Courouve, Claude. ‘La Societe des Emiles. Chanson de J. Duflos

(A.

Glatigny)’ (1871) www.multimania.com/jgir/emiles.htm

Courouve, C. Vocabulaire de Phomosexualite masculine. Payot, 1985.
Courouve, C. ‘Complements a mon ouvrage Vocabulaire de Phomosexualite
masculine. Paris: Payot, 1985.’ 13

Coward, David.

‘Attitudes

to

December 1999. (website)

Homosexuality in 18th-Century Erance’.

Journal of European Studies, 10 (1980), 231-55.
Crain, Caleb. American Sympathy. Men, Friendship, and Literature in the New
Nation. Yale, 2001.
Crisp, Quentin. The Naked Civil Servant. 1968; Quality Paperback, 2000.

Crompton, Louis. ‘Gay Genocide: from Leviticus to Hitler’. In L. Crew,
ed.

The Gay Academic. Palm Springs: ETC, 1978.

Crompton, L. Byron and Greek Love. Homophobia in 19th-Century England.
Eaber, 1985.

Crompton, L. ‘The Myth of Lesbian Impunity: Capital Laws from 1270 to
\19V. Journal of Homosexuality, VI, 1-2 (1980-1); and in The Gay Past.

A Collection of Historical Essays. Eds S. J. Licata and R. P. Petersen.
Binghamton: Harrington Park, 1985.
Custine, Astolphe de. Aloys ou

le

Religieux du Mont Saint-Bemard. Ed.

P.

Senart. 10/18, 1971.

Dallemagne, Jules. Degenerk et desequilibres. Alcan; Brussels: Lamertin, 1895.
Dall’Orto, Giovanni. ‘Sodoma aH’Improwiso’. Babilonia, 133

(May 1995),

68-70.
Darien, Georges (G.-H. Adrien). Biribi. 1890; Martineau, 1966.

Davenport-Hines, Richard. Sex, Death and Punishment. Attitudes to Sex and
Sexuality Since the Renaissance. Collins, 1990.

David, Hugh.

On Queer Street. A Social History of British Homosexuality,

1895-1995. HarperCollins, 1997.

[312]

Works Cited
Debay, Auguste. Hygiene et physiologie du manage: histoire naturelle et medicate
de

Vhomme et de la femme maries^ dans ses plus curieux dHails. Hygiene

spkiale de la femme enceinte et du nouveau-nL Dentu, 1862.

David.

Deitcher,

Hear

Friends:

American Photographs of Men

Together,

1840-1918. Abrams, 2001.
Delcourt, Pierre. Le Vice a Paris. Piaget, 1888.
Delecluze, Etienne-Jean. Journal de Delecluze, 1824-1828. Ed. R. Baschet.
Grasset, 1948.

Delepierre, Octave -Joseph (‘M. Aude’). Dissertation sur les idks morales des
grecs et sur le danger de lire Platon.

Rouen: Lemonnyer, 1879.

Del Ditto, Victor. En marge des manuscrits de Stendhal. PUE, 1955.
Delvau, Alfred. Dictionnaire erotique moderne, par un professeiir de la langue
verte.

1864; 2nd ed. Neuchatel: Societe des Bibliophiles cosmopolites,

1874.

D’Emilio, John and E. B. Ereedman. Intimate Matters. A History of Sexuality
in America.

Harper & Row, 1988.

Derks, Paul. Die Schande der heiligen Paderastie. Homosexualitdt und Ojfentlichkeit in der deutschen Literatur,

1150-1850. Rosa Winkel, 1990.

Descaves, Lucien. Sous-ojfs: roman militaire. Tresse

& Stock, 1890.

Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes. The Autobiography of G. Lowes Dickinson and

Other Unpublished Writings. Ed. D. Proctor. Duckworth, 1973.
Diderot, Denis. Oeuvres. Ed. A. Billy. Pleiade, 1951.

Dio Chrysostom. Dio Chrysostom. Tr. J. W. Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby.
III.

Heinemann; Harvard UP, 1951.

Donoghue, Denis. Walter Pater: Lover of Strange Souls. Knopf, 1995.
Donoghue,

Emma.

Passions

Between

Women.

British

Lesbian

Culture,

1668-1801. Scarlet Press, 1993.

Dowling, Linda. Hellenism and Homosexuality in

Victorian Oxford. Cornell,

1994; 1996.

Doyle, Arthur Conan. The Penguin Complete Sherlock Holmes. Ed. C. Morley.

Penguin, 1981.
Doyle, A. C. Memories and Adventures. 1924; Oxford UP, 1989.
[Drysdale, George.] The Elements of Social Science;

or,

Physical,

Sexual and

Natural Religion. By a Graduate of Medicine. 7th ed. Truelove, 1867.
Dubarry, Armand. Les Invertis {Les Desequilibres de Vamour). Daragon, 1906.

Duberman, Martin. About Time. Exploring the Gay Past. 1986; Meridian,
1991.

Duberman, M., ed. A Queer World. The Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies
Reader.

New York, 1997.

Works Cited
Duberman, M., M. Vicinus and G. Chauncey, eds. Hidden from History.
Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past. 1989; Penguin, 1991.

Duchesne, Edouard- Adolphe. De la prostitution dans la ville d'Alger depuis la
conquHe. Bailliere, 1853.

Dugas, Ludovic. LAmitie antique d^aprh les moeurs populaires et les theories des
philosophes. Alcan, 1894; *1914. Arno Press, 1976.

Duras, Duchesse de. Olivier ou le secret. Ed. D. Virieux. Corti, 1971.
Dyer, Richard. ‘Children of the Night: Vampirism as Homosexuality, Homosexuality as Vampirism’. In Secret Dreams. Sexuality, Gender and Popular
Fiction.

Ed. S. Radstone. Lawrence & Wishart, 1988.

Dynes, Wayne, et al. Encyclopedia of Homosexuality. 2 vols. Garland, 1990.
‘Earl Lind’ (a.k.a. ‘Ralph Werther’

and ‘Jennie June’). Autobiography of an

Androgyne. Ed. A. W. Herzog. New York: The Medico-Legal Journal,
1918; Arno Press, 1975.
‘Earl Lind’.

The Female-lmpe?'sonato?'s. A Sequel to the Autobiography of an

Androgyne and an account of some of the authoFs experiences during his six
years'’ career as instinctive female-impersonator in

together with the

life stories

New YorHs Underworld;

of androgyne associates and an outline of his

subsequently acquired knowledge of kindred phenomena of human character

and psychology. Ed. A. W. Herzog. New York: The Medico-Legal Journal,
1922; Arno Press, 1975.

Eekhoud, Georges. Fscal-Vigor. Roman. 1899; Mercure de Prance, 1901.

Ehrman, Bart D., ed. The New Testament and Other Early Christian Writings.
Oxford UP, 1998.
Eisenberg, Daniel.

‘

“La Escondida Senda”: Homosexuality

in

Spanish

History and Culture’. In D. W. Poster, ed. Spanish Writers on Gay and
Lesbian Themes.

A Bio-Critical Sourcebook. Greenwood Press, 1999.

Eldorado. Homosexuelle Frauen und Manner in Berlin 1850-1950. Berlin, 1984.
Ellis, Havelock. Studies in the Psychology of Sex. II.

1910; New York: Random

House, 1936.
Ellis,

H. On Sexual Inversion (1896, with J. A. Symonds), see p. 52.

Ellmann, Richard. Oscar Wilde. Hamish Hamilton, 1987.
Engelstein, Laura. The Keys to Happiness. Sex and the Search for Modernity in
Fin-de-Siecle Russia. Cornell, 1992.

Epstein, Julia and K. Straub, eds. Body Guards. The Cultural Politics of Gender

Ambiguity. Routledge, 1991.

Eskridge, Jr, William

Harvard, 1999.

N. Gay law. Challenging the Apartheid of the Closet.

Works Cited
Faber, Geoffrey. Oxford Apostles:

A Character Study of the Oxford Movement.

Faber, 1933.

Faderman, Lillian. Scotch Verdict. Miss Pirie and Miss Woods v. Dame Gumming
Gordon. Quartet, 1985.

Faderman, L. Surpassing the Love ofMen. Romantic Friendship and Love Between

Women from the Renaissance to the Present. Morrow, 1981; Women’s Press,
1985.

Faderman, L., ed. Chloe Plus Olivia. An Anthology of Lesbian Literature from
the Seventeenth Century to the Present. 1994; Penguin, 1995.

Farrer, Peter, ed. Men in Petticoats.

A Selection of Letters fi’om Victorian News-

papers. Liverpool: Karn, 1987.
Felix,

David. Keynes. A Critical Life. Greenwood Press, 1999.

Fere, Charles. La Pathologie des emotions: etudes physiologiques et cliniques. Alcan,

1892.

Fernandez, Dominique. Le Rapt de Ganymede. Grasset, 1989.
Flaubert, Gustave. Correspondance. 4 vols. Ed. J. Bruneau. Pleiade, 197 3-.

Fodere, Fran^ois-Emmanuel. Traite de medecine legale et d'hygiene publique ou
de police de sante. 6 vols. Marne, 1813.
Eorster, E. M.

The Life to Come. Arnold, 1972.

Eorster, E. M. Maurice. Ed. P. N. Eurbank. Penguin, 1972.

Poster, Jeannette H. Sex Variant Women in Literature.
tative Survey.

A Historical and Quanti-

Frederick Muller, 1958.

Foucault, Michel. Histoire de la sexualite. I. La Volonte de savoir. Gallimard,
1976.
Fourier, Charles. Le Nouveau monde amoureux. 2nd ed., 1845. Ed. S. Debout-

Oleszkiewicz. Oeuvres completes. VII. Anthropos, 1971.

Fournier- Verneuil. Paris, tableau moral et philosophique. Chez les principaux
libraires, 1826.

Frankel, Hieronymous. ‘Flomo mollis’. Medicinische Zeitung vom Verein fur

Heilkunde in Preufien, XXII (1853), 101-3.

Freud, Sigmund. A Case of Hysteria, Three Essays on Sexuality, and Other
Works. In The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works. VII.

Gen ed. J. Strachey. Hogarth Press, 1953-74.
Frey, Julia. Toulouse-Lautrec.

A Life. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1994.

Furbank, P. N. E. M. Forster. A Life. 1977-8; Sphere Books, 1988.

Gamier, Paul. La Folk a Paris: Hude statistique, clinique et medico-legale. Bailliere,

1890. Parts in Les Fetichistes. Bailliere, 1896.

[515]

Works Cited
Gautier, Theophile. Mademoiselle de Maupin. 1835; ed. J. Robichez. Impri-

merie Nationale, 1979.
Gay, Peter. Voltaire’s Politics: the Poet as Realist. Princeton UP, 1959.
Gay, P. The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud. 5 vols. Oxford UP, 1984-98.

Gerard, Kent and G. Hekma, eds. The Pursuit of Sodomy: Male Homosexuality
in Renaissance and Enlightenment Europe.

Haworth, 1988. (= Journal of

Homosexuality., XVI, 1-2.)

Gide, Andre. Coiydon. Quatf'e dialogues socratiques. Gallimard, 1924. 1st ed.
(ends in 3rd Dialogue); C.R.D.N. (Bruges, 1911); 2nd ed., 1920.

Gide, A. Si le grain ne meurt. Nouvelle Revue ffan 9 aise, 1926.
Gide, A. Et nunc manet in te, suivi de Journal intime. Ides et Calendes, 1947.
Gifford,

James.

Dayneford’s

Library.

American

Homosexual

Writing,

1900-1913. U. of Massachusetts, 1995.
Gilbert, Arthur N. ‘Buggery and the British Navy, 1700-1861’. Journal of
Social History, X,

1

(Fall 1976),

72-98.

Goldberg, Jonathan, ed. Reclaiming Sodom. Routledge, 1994.

Goncourt, Edmond de. La Faustin. Flammarion-Fasquelle, 1882.
Goncourt, E. and Jules de. Journal. Memoires de la vie litteraire. 3 vols. Ed.
R. Ricatte. Laffont, 1989.

Goodman, Jonathan, ed. The Oscar Wilde File. xAllison & Busby, 1988; 1995.
Grand-Carteret, John. DerriHe TuV [the Kaiser]: IHomo-sexualite en Allemagne. 1908; Lille: Cahiers Gai-Kitsch-Camp, 1992.

Greenberg, David E The Construction of Homosexuality. Chicago, 1988.
Gregorovius, Ferdinand. Wanderjahre in Italien. 1856-77; ed. F. Schillmann.
Jess, 1928.

Grosskurth, PhyWis. John Addington Symonds: A Biography. Longmans, 1964.

Gunther, Scott. ‘La Construction de I’identite homosexuelle dans les lois
aux Etats-Unis et en France’.
principal).

DEA de Sciences Sociales (memoire

Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, September

1995.

Gury, Christian. LHonneur musical d’un capitaine homosexuel en 1880. De
Courteline a Proust. Kime, 1999.

Haas, Eran 9 ois. Per scientiam adjustitiam? Uopposition a la repression penale de
Phomosexualite dans VAllemagne de Guillaume II. (Thesis)

Haggerty, George. Men in Love: Masculinity and Sexuality in the Eighteenth
Century. Columbia UP, 1999.

Hale, Nathan G. Jr. Freud and the Americans. The Beginnings of Psychoanalysis
in the

United States, 1876-1917. Oxford UP, 1971.

[316]

,

Works Cited
Hall, Radclyffe. The Well of Loneliness. 1928; ed. A. Hennegan. Virago, 1982.

Hamer, Dean and R Copeland, The Science of Desire: The Search for the Gay
Gene and the Biology of Behavior. Simon & Schuster, 1994.
Harris, Frank. The Man Shakespeare and his Tragic Life-Story. Frank Palmer,

1909.
Harris, F. Oscar Wilde. 1916; Robinson, 1992.

Hartland, Claude [pseud.]. The Story of a Life: for the Consideration of the

Medical Fraternity. St Louis, 1901; San Francisco: Grey Fox, 1985.

Harvey, Arnold D. ‘Prosecutions for Sodomy in England at the beginning
of the 19th Century’. Historical Journal, XXI, 4 (1978), 939-48.

Hayes, Joseph J. ‘Gayspeak’. The Quarterly Journal of Speech LXII, 3 (October
1976), 256-66.

Healey, Dan. Homosexual Desire in Revolutionary Russia: the Regulation of

Sexual and Gender Dissent. Chicago, 2001.
Heilbut, Anthony. Thomas Mann. Eros and Literature. Macmillan, 1995; 1996.

Hekma, Gert. ‘Homosexual Behaviour in the 19th-Century Dutch Army’.
Journal of the History of Sexuality, II, 2 (October 1991), 266-88. Also in

John Font, ed. Forbidde?i History. Chicago, 1992.
Henke, Adolph Christian Heinrich. Lehrbuch der

gerichtlichen

Medicin.

Stuttgart: Wolters, 1832.

Hensher, Philip. ‘Gay art lite’. Prospect Magazine, March 2002.

Hermant, Abel. Le Cavalier Miserey, 21 e Chasseurs: moeurs militaires contemporaines.

1887; Ollendorff, 1901.

Hichens, Robert S. The Green Carnation. Heinemann, 1894.
Higgins, Patrick, ed. A Queer Reader. Fourth Estate, 1993.

Higgs, David, ed. Queer Sites. Gay Urban Histories Since 1600. Routledge,
1999.
Hirschfeld, Magnus. Berlins dfittes Geschlecht. Schwules und lesbisches Leben im
Berlin der Jahrhundertwende. 1905; ed. M. Herzer.

Rosa Winkel, 1991.

Tr. Le Troisieme sexe, Les Homosexuels de Berlin (1908).

Hirschfeld, M. Die Homosexualitdt des Mannes und des Weibes. Berlin: Marcus,

1914. The Homosexuality of Men and Women. Tr. M. A. Lombardi-Nash.

Prometheus, 2000.
Hirschfeld, M., see Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare Komi tee.

Hitchcock, Tim. English Sexualities, 1700-1800. Macmillan, 1997.

Hocquenghem, Guy. Homosexual Desire. 1972; tr. D. Dangoor, 1978; Duke
UP, 1993.

Hofmann, Eduard Ritter von. Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Medizin, mit gleichmdfiiger Beriicksichtigung der deutschen

[317]

und dsterreichischen Gesetzgebung.

Works Cited
1878; 10th ed. Ed. A. Haberda. Berlin and Vienna: Urban

& Schwarzen-

berg, 1919.

& Scarlet Marquess. The Real Trial of Oscar

Holland, Merlin. Irish Peacock
Wilde.

Fourth Estate, 2003.

Holloway, Robert. The Phoenix of Sodom.^ or the Vere Street Coterie., Being an
Exhibition of the Gambols Practised by the Ancient Lechers of Sodom and

Gomorrah, embellished and improved with the Modem Refinements in Sodomitical Practices, by the members of the Vere Street Coterie, of detestable memory.

London, 1813.

Home

Office

and Scottish

Home

Department

(Sir

John Wolfenden,

Chairman). Repon of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution.

HMSO, September 1957.

Hopkins, Gerard Manley. The Sermons and Devotional Writings. Ed. C.
Devlin. 1959; Oxford UP, 1967.
Hossli, Heinrich.
Geschichte,

Ei^os.

Die Mdnnerliebe der Griechen, ihre Beziehungen zur

Literatur

liber platonische

und Gesetzgebung aller Zeiten. Oder Forschungen

Liebe,

ihre

Wurdigung und Entwurdigung fur Sitten-,

Natur- und Volkerkunde. 1836, 1838; 2nd ed. Munster i.d. Schweiz: beim

Herausgeber [1840].

Hughes, Thomas. The Manliness of Christ. Macmillan, 1879; 1894.

Huysmans, Joris-Karl. H rebours. 1884; ed. P. Waldner. Garnier-Flammarion,
1978.

Hyam, Ronald. Empire and Sexuality. The British Experience. Manchester,
1990; 1991.

Hyde, H. Montgomery. The Trials of Oscar Wilde. 1962; Dover, 1973.
Hyde,

El.

M. The Other Love. An Historical and Contemporary Survey of

Homosexuality in Britain. Heinemann, 1970.

Isherwood, Christopher. Mr Norris Changes Trains, 1935; Penguin, 1961.

James, Henry. Italian Hours. Ed. J. Auchard. 1992; Penguin, 1995.
James, H. Letters. 4 vols. Ed. L. Edel. Harvard UP, 1974-84.

Dr Jeffrey. ‘The Bible and Homosexuality’.
Journal (Summer 1990), 12-23.

John, Rev.

Christian Action

Johnson, Susan Lee. Roaring Camp. The Social World of the California Gold
Rush. Norton, 2000.

Jones, Ernest. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud. 3 vols. Basic Books,

1953-57.

Works Cited
Jones, James W.'We of the Third Sex\ Literary Representations of Homosexuality
in

Wilhelmine Germany. Peter Lang, 1990.

Joux, Otto de. Die Enterbten des Liebesgliickes oder Das dritte Geschlecht. Leipzig:

Spohr, 1893.

Kaplan, Justin. Walt Whitman: A Life. Simon and Schuster, 1980.
Karlinsky, Simon. The Sexual Labyrinth of Nicolai Gogol. Harvard, 1976.

Karsch-Haack, Ferdinand. ‘Uranismus oder Paderastie und Tribadie bei den
Naturvolkern’. 7/rZ, III (1901), 72-201.
Katz, Jonathan. Gay American History. Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A. A

Documentary. Thomas Y. Crowell, 1976.
Katz, J. Love Stories. Sex Between Men Before Homosexuality. Chicago, 2001.

Documents of the Homosexual Rights Movement
1836-1927. Arno Press, 1975.

Katz,

ed.

J.,

in

Germany^

Kehoe, Monika, ed. Historical^ Literary and Erotic Aspects of Lesbianism. Harrington Park, 1986.

Kennedy, Hubert. Ulrichs. The Life and Works of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Pioneer
of the Modem Gay Movement. Boston: Alyson, 1988.

Khanna, Shamona. ‘Gay Rights’. The Lawyers, June 1992.
Kleist, Heinrich von. Sdmtliche Werke und Briefe. IV. Briefe von und an Heinrich

von Kleist, 1793-1811. Ed. K. Miiller-Salget and S. Ormanns. Deutscher
Klassiker Verlag, 1997.

Kraepelin, Emil. Psych iatrie: ein Lehrbuch fiir Studirende und Aerzte. 5th ed.
Leipzig: Barth, 1896.

Krafft-Ebing, Richard von. Psychopathia sexualis. Mit besonderer Beriicksichti-

gung der kontrdren Sexualempfindung. Eine medizinisch-gerichtliche Studie
fur Arzte und Juristen. 1886; 14th ed. 1912; Matthes & Seitz, 1997.
Kurella,

Hans. Naturgeschichte

des

Verbrechers:

Grundzuge der

criminellen

Anthropologie und Criminalpsychologie. Stuttgart: Enke, 1893.

Kuzniar, Alice, ed. Outing Goethe and His Age. Stanford, 1996.

Lacassagne, Albert. ‘Pederastie’. Dictionnaire encyclopedique des sciences medicales.

2nd

series

(1869-89),

XXII,

239-59;

‘Tatouage’.

3rd

series

(1874-87), XVI, 12T-5.

Lacassagne, Jean and P. Devaux. LArgot du ^milieu\ New ed. Albin Michel,
1948.

La Chatre, Maurice. Nouveau Dictionnaire universel.
Librairie, 1865-70.

[319]

2 vols.

Docks de la

Works Cited
Lacroix, Paul. Histohr de la prostitution chez tons les peuples du monde: depuis

VAntiquite la plus reculee jusqu'a nos jours. III. Sere, 1852.

Lalande, Fran9oise. ‘L’Examen corporel d’un

homme de lettres’. Pa?^ade

sauvage, 2 (April 1985), 97-8.
Lariviere, Michel. Homosexuels et bisexuels celebres: le Dictionnaire. Deletraz,

1997.
Lariviere, M. Pour tout Vamour des hommes: anthologie de Phomosexualite dans
la litt&atmr.

Deletraz, 1998.

Larousse, Pierre. Grand Dictionnaire universel du XIX^ siecle. 1866-79.
Laupts, see Saint-Paul, Georges.

Lauvergne, Hubert. Les Formats consideres sous le rapport physiologique., moral et
intellectuel: observes au

bagne de Toulon. Bailliere, 1841.

Lawrence, T. E. The Selected Letters. Ed. M. Brown. Dent, 1988.

Le Baillif de La Riviere, Roch. Premier t?mcte de Phomme., et de son essentielle
anatomie avec les elemens,

& ce qui est en eux. Langelier, 1580.

Leeves, Edward. Leaves frotn a Victorian Diary. Intro. J. Sparrow. The Alison
Press / Seeker

& Warburg, 1985.

Le Gallienne, Richard. The Book-Bills of Narcissus. 1891; Lane, 1895.
Legrand du Saulle, Henri. Le De'lire des persecutions. Plon, 1871.
Lejeune, Philippe. ‘Autobiographie et homosexualite en France au XIX^
siecle’.

Romantisme, 56 (1987), 79-100.

Leland, Charles Godfrey. The Altetmate Sex, or The Female Intellect in Man,

and the Masculine in Woman. Wellby, 1904.
Lesbian History Group. Not a Passing Phase. Reclaiming Lesbians in History

1840-1985. The Women’s Press, 1989; 1993.
Lever, Maurice. Les Buchers de Sodome: histoire des infdmes. Fayard, 1985.

Lind, Earl, see ‘Earl Lind’.
Lister, Anne. / Know

My Own Heart. The Diaries of Anne Lister 1791-1840.

Ed. H. Whitbread. New York UP, 1992. [Excerpts from 1817-1824.]
Lister,

A.

No Priest But Love.

Excerpts from

the

Diaries of Anne Lister,

1824-1826. Ed. H. Whitbread. Otley: Smith Settle, 1992.
Littre, Emile. Diction?iahx de la langue franqaise. Hachette, 1873-5.

Livet, Charles-Louis. Les Intrigues de Moliere et

celles

de sa femme ou

La

Fameuse comedienne. Histoire de La Guerin. Isidore Liseux, 1877.

Lombroso, Cesare and Guglielmo Ferrero. La Donna delinquente, la prostituta
e la

donna nojmale. Turin and Rome: Roux, 1893. La Femme criminelle

et la prostituee. Tr.

L. Meille. Alcan, 1896.

Lorrain, Jean. Le Vice errant. II. Les Noronsojf. Ollendorff, 1922.
Lorrain, J. Cotrespondance. Ed. G. Normandy. Baudiniere, 1929.

[320]

Works Cited
Louys, Pierre. Les Chansons de Bilitis, traduites du grec. Mercure de France,
1898.
Lovell,

Mary S. A Rage to Live: A Biography of Richard and Isabel Burton.

Little,

Brown, 1998.

Lucas, Ian. ‘The Color of His Eyes: Polari and the Sisters of Perpetual
Indulgence’. In A. Livia and K. Hall, eds. Queerly Phrased: Language,

Gender and Sexuality. Oxford UP, 1997.
Lucas, Prosper. Traite philosophique et physiologique de Ph&edite naturelle dans
les etats de

sante et de maladie du systeme nerveux. 2 vols. Bailliere, 1847

and 1850.
Lucien, Mirande. Eekhoud le rauque. P. U. du Septentrion, 1999.

Luppe, Albert, comte de. Astolphe de Custine. Editions du Rocher, 1957.
Lydston, G. Erank. Impotence and

Sterility

with Aberrations of the Sexual

Function and Sex-Gland Implantation. Chicago: Riverton Press, 1917.

Lynch, Michael. ‘Here is Adhesiveness: from Eriendship to Homosexuality’.
Victoria?! Studies,

XXIX, I (Autumn 1985), 67-96.

Lyttelton, Edward. The Causes and Prevention of Immorality in Schools. Social

Purity Alliance. Privately printed, 1877; 1887.

Maccubbin, Robert Purks,

ed.

^Tis

Nature^s Fault: Unauthorized Sexuality

During the Enlightenment. Cambridge UP, 1987.

Mace, Gustave. La Police parisienne. Le Service de la Surete. Charpentier, 1885.
Macintosh, Mary. ‘The Homosexual Role’. Social Pi’oblems, XVI, 2
1968), 182-92. In K.

(Eall

Plummer, ed. The Making of the Modern Homo-

sexual. Hutchinson, 1981.

Macintosh, M. ‘Gayspeak’. Lunch, 16 (January 1973), 7-9.

Magnan, Valentin. Recherches sur les centres nerveux: alcoolisme, folk des herMitaires degeneres, paralysie generale, medecine legale. II. Masson, 1893.

Malmstad, John E. and N. Bogomolov. Mikhail Kuzmin. A

Life in Art.

Harvard, 1999.

Mann, Thomas. Lecture on Platen (1930). In Schriften und Reden zur Literatur,

Kunst und Philosophie. Eischer, 1968. II, 33-43.

Maranon, Gregorio. La Evolucion de la sexualidad y los estados intersexuales
(1930). The Evolution of Sex

Wells. Allen

Marx, Heinrich.

and Intersexual Conditions. Tr. Warre B.

& Unwin, 1932.
Urningsliebe. Die sittliche

Hebung des Urningthums und die

Streichung des §17 S des deutschen Strafgesetzbuchs. Leipzig, 1875.

Mason, Michael. The Making of Victorian Sexuality. Oxford UP, 1 994.

[321]

Works Cited
Maupassant, Guy de. La Femme de Paid. In La Maison Tellier (1881). Ed. L.
Forestier. Folio, 1973.

Mavor, Elizabeth, ed. A Year with the Ladies of Llangollen. Penguin, 1984;
1986.

Mayer,

Aussenseiter.

Suhrkamp, 1975.

Maynard, Steven. ‘Through
Subcultures,

Police

a

Hole in the Lavatory Wall: Homosexual

Surveillance,

and the Dialectics of Discovery,

Toronto, 1890-1930’. Journal of the History of Sexuality^ V, 2 (October
1994), 207-42.

McCalman, Iain. Radical Underworld. Prophets, Revolutionaries, and Pomographers in London, 1795-1840. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.

McCormick, Ian. Sexual Outcasts. II. Roudedge, 2000.
Mecke, Gunter. Franz Kafkas offenbares Geheimnis. Fine Psychopathographie.

Wilhelm Fink, 1982.
Meer, Theo van der. De wesentlijke sonde van sodomie en andere vuyligheeden.
Sodomieten vervolgingen in Amsterdam 1730-1811. Amsterdam: Tabula,
1984.

Meer, T. van der. ‘Tribades on Trial: Female Same-Sex Offenders in Late
18th-Century Amsterdam’. Journal of the History of Sexuality,

I,

3

Oanuary 1991), 424-45.
Melville, Herman. Redbum. His First Voyage. Ed. H. Beaver. Penguin, 1982.
Melville,

H. Billy Budd, Sailor and Other Stories. Ed. H. Beaver. Penguin,

1985.

Mendes, Catulle. La Maison de la vieille. Roman contemporain. 1894; ed. J.-J.
Lefrere et al. Champ Vallon, 2000.

Mendes, C. Mephistophda. Roman contemporain. Dentu, 1890.
Merrick, Jeffrey. ‘Commissioner Foucault, Inspector Noel, and the “Pederasts”

of Paris,

1780-3’. Journal of Social History,

XXXII,

2

(1998),

287-307.
Merrick, J. and Bryant T. Ragan, eds. Homosexuality in Modem France. Oxford

UP, 1996.
Mery, Joseph. Monsieur Auguste. 1859; Levy, 1871.
Meyers, Jeffrey. Homosexuality and Literature, 1890-1930. Athlone Press,
1977.
Miller, D. A.

The Novel and the Police. U. of California, 1988.

Miller, Neil. Out of the Past: Gay and Lesbian History from 1869 to the Present.

Vintage, 1995.

Millward, Keith.

U Oeuvre de Pierre Loti et Pesprit Tin de siecle\ Nizet, 1955.

Mirbeau, Octave. La 628-E8. 1907; Charpentier, 1918.

Works Cited
Mitchell, Mark and David Leavitt, eds. Pages Passed from Hand to Hand. The

Hidden Tradition of Homosexual Literature in English from 1748 to 1914.
1997; Vintage, 1999.

Moers, Ellen. The Dandy. Brummell to Beerbohm. Seeker & Warburg, 1960.
Moll, Mbert. Die contrare Sexualempfindung. 1891; 2nd ed., 1893. Tr. Drs
Pactet and Romme. Les Perversions de Pinstinct genital. Etude sur Pinversion
sexuelle basee sur des documents officiels. Carre, 1893.

Mondimore, Francis Mark.

A Natural History of Homosexuality. Johns

Hopkins UP, 1996.
Monter, E. William. ‘La Sodomie a I’epoque moderne en Suisse romande’.
Annales, 29, 4 (July-August 1974), 1023-33.

Moran, Leslie J. The Homosexuality) of Law. Routledge, 1996.
Moreau, L. Les Aberrations du sens genesique. n.p., 1887.

Moreau (de Tours), Jacques-Joseph. La Psych ologie morbide dans ses rapports
avec la philosophic de Phistoire ou De Pinfluence des nevropathes sur le dynamisme intellectuel. Masson, 1859.

Morel, Benedict-Auguste. Traite theorique et pratique des maladies mentales:
consida'ces dans leur nature, leur traitement, et dans leur rapport avec la

medecine legale des alienes. 2 vols. Bailliere, 1852-3.

Morel, B.-A. Traite des degenerescences physiques,

intellectuelles et

morales de

Pesphe humaine et des causes qui produisent ces varietes maladives. Bailliere,
1857.

Morgan, Fidelis. The Well-Known Trouble-Maker: A Life of Charlotte Clarke.
Faber, 1988.
iMorselli, Enrico. Manuale di semejotica delle malattie mentali: guida alia diagnosi
della pazzia per i medici,

i

medico-legisti e gli studenti. II. Vallardi, 1885.

Mosse, George L. Nationalism and Sexuality. Respectability and Abnormal Sexuality in Modern Europe. Fertig,

1985.

Mowl, Timothy. William Beckford. Composing for Mozart. ]ohnMMrv2iY, 1998.
Muhlstein, Anka. Astolphe de Custine: the Last French Aristocrat. Tr. T. Waugh.

Duckworth, 2001.
Muller, Klaus. Aber in meinem Herzen sprach eine Stimme so laut. Homosexuelle
Autobiographien und medizinische Pathographien im neunzehnten Jahrhun-

den. Rosa Winkel, 1991.

Murdoch, Iris. ‘The Moral Decision About Homosexuality’. Man and Society,
1

(Summer 1964), 3-6.

Murphy, Steve. Rimbaud et la menagerie imperiale. CNRS; P. U. de Lyon,
1991.

[3^3]

Works Cited
Murphy, S., ed. A. Rimbaud, Un Cosur sous une soutane. Musee-Bibliotheque
Arthur Rimbaud, 1991.
Murray, Douglas. Bosk.

A Biogf'aphy of Lord Alfi-ed Douglas. Hodder &

Stoughton, 2000.
Musil, Robert. Die Venvirrungen des Zdglings Tdrlefi (1906). In Gesammelte
Werke. Ed. A. Frise. VI. Rowohlt, 1978.

Nabokov, Vladimir. ‘Die Homosexualitat im Russischen Strafgesetzbuch’.
7/fZ, V, 2 (1903), 1159-71.

Newbould, Brian. Schubert. The Music and the Man. Gollancz, 1997.
Nicholson, John Gambril. A Garland of Ladslove. Privately printed, 1911.
Nicolson, Nigel. Portrait of a MafTiage. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1973.

Noakes, Vivien. Edward Lear. The Life of a Wanderer. Collins, 1968.

Norton, Rictor. Mother Clap's Molly House. The Gay Subculture in England
1700-1830. GMP, 1992.

Norton, R. The Myth of the Mode?-n Homosexual. Queer History and the Search
for Cultw^al Unity. Cassell, 1997.

Norton, R. ‘Walt Whitman, Prophet of Gay Liberation’. ‘The Great Queens
of History’.

18

November 1999 <http://www.infopt.demon.co.uk/

whitman.htm>.
Norton,

R.,

comp. ‘The John Addington Symonds Pages’. 1997; 2000

<http://www.infopt.demon.co.uk/symindex.htm>.

Notopoulos, James A. The Platonism of Shelley. A Study of Platonism and the
Poetic Mind. Duke UP, 1949.

Nye, Robert A. Sexuality. Oxford UP, 1999.
O’Brien, M. D. Socialism and Infamy. The Homogenic or Comrade Love Exposed:

An Open Letter in Plain Words for a Socialist Prophet. 3 eds. Sheffield:
privately printed, 1909.

Ogrinc, Will H. L. ‘A Shrine to Love and Sorrow. Jacques d’Adelsward-

Fersen (1880-1923)’. semgai.free.fr/contenu/textes/fersen/W_Ogrinc
Fersen.html
Orr, Dave. ‘Sex in the City: Social Responses to Same-Sex Sex Between

Men in Early Nineteenth-Century London’. Institute of Historical
Research, U. of London Seminar, October 2001.

Paglia, Camille. Sexual Personae.

Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily

Dickinson. Yale UP, 1990.

Parent-Duchatelet, A.-J.-B. De la prostitution dans la ville de Paris, consideree

[324]

Works Cited
sous

le

rapport de Vhygiene publique^ de la morale et de

Padministration.

1836; 3rd ed. 2 vols. Bailliere, 1857.
Pearsall, Ronald.

The Woym in the Bud: the World of Victorian Sexuality. 1969;

Pimlico, 1993.
Perrot, Michelle. ‘1848. Revolution et prisons’. In LTmpossible prison: recherches sur le systeme penitentiaire au XIX^ siecle. Ed. M. Perrot. Seuil, 1980.

Pichois, Claude and Alain Brunet. Colette. De Fallois, 1999.

Plummer, Kenneth. Sexual Stigma: an Interactionist Account. Routledge, 1975.
Pollard, Patrick. Andre Gide^ Homosexual Moralist. Yale UP, 1991.

Popp, Wolfgang. Mdnnerliebe. Homosexualitdt und Literatur. Metzler, 1992.
Porter, Kevin and J. Weeks, eds. Between the Acts. Lives of Homosexual Men,

1885-1961. Routledge, 1991.
Porter, Roy and L. Hall. The Facts of Life. The Creation of Sexual Knowledge
in Britain,

1650-1950. Yale UP, 1995.

Pougy, Liane de (Marie Chassaigne). Idylle saphique. La Plume, 1901.
Pouillet, Thesee. De Vonanisme chez Vhomme. Vigot, 1897.

Poznansky, Alexander. Tchaikovsky^s Last Days. A Documentary Study. Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1996.
Prime-Stevenson, Edward Irenaeus. The Intersexes. A History of Similisexualism as a Problem in Social Life.

By Xavier Mayne. Naples: privately

printed, c. 1908.

Prime-Stevenson, E. I. Imre: A Memorandum. Edited [i.e. written] by Xavier

Mayne. Naples: The English Book-Press, 1906; Arno Press, 1975.
Prince, Alison. Hans Christian Andersen. The Fan Dancer. Allison

& Busby,

1998.

Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph. Les Evangiles. Lacroix, 1866.
Proust, Marcel.

A la recherche du temps perdu. Ed. J.-Y. Tadie. Pleiade,

1987-89.
Pushkin, Alexander. The Letters of Alexander Pushkin. Ed... and tr. J. T. Shaw.

U. of Wisconsin, 1967.
Pyle,

Howard. The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood of Great Renown,

Nottinghamshire. Sampson, Low

in

& Co., 1883.

Rachilde (Marguerite Eymery). Monsieur Venus. 1884; Brossier, 1889.
Raffalovich, Marc-Andre. Uranisme et unisexualite. Etude sur dijferentes manifestations

de

Pinstinct

sexuel.

Storck;

Masson,

‘Bibliotheque

de

criminologie’, 1896.

Ramdohr, Friedrich Wilhelm Basilius von. Venus Urania. Uber die Natur der
Liebe, iiber ihre Veredlung und Verschbnerung. 3 parts. Leipzig, 1798.

[325]

Works Cited
Rau, Hans. Franz Grillparzer imd sem Liebesleben. Barsdorf, 1904.

Reade, Brian, ed. Sexual Heretics: Male Homosexuality in English Literature,

1850-1900. Routledge, 1970.
Reed, T. J. Death in Venice. Making and Unmaking a Master. Twayne, 1994.
Reydellet, Pierre.

‘Pederastie’.

Dictionaire

[sic]

des sciences medicales.

Ed.

Adelon et al. XL. Panckoucke, 1819. Pp. 37-45.
Rivers, J. E. Proust and the Ay't of Love. The Aesthetics of Sexuality in the Life,
Times, and Art of Marcel Proust. Columbia UP, 1980.

Robb, Graham. La Poe'sie de Baudelaire et la poesie franqaise, 1 838-1852. Aubier,
1993.

Robb, G. Balzac: A Biography. Picador; Norton, 1 994.
Robb, G. Rimbaud. Picador; Norton, 2000.
Robinson, Alfred. Life in California During a Residence of Several Years in That
TeiTitory.

1846. Ed. A. Rolle. Peregrine, 1970.

Robinson, Paul. Gay Lives. Homosexual Autobiography from John Addington

Symonds to Paul Monette. U. of Chicago, 1999.
Rolfe, Erederick (‘Baron Corvo’). Hadrian the Seventh.

1904; Chatto

&

Windus, 1950.
Rolfe, E Stories Toto Told Me, or

A Sensational Atomist. In His Own Image, by

Baron Corvo. Lane, 1901.
Rolfe, E The Venice Letters. Ed. C. Woolf. Cecil and Amelia Woolf, 1974.

Rosario, Vernon A., ed. Science and Homosexualities. Routledge, 1997.

Who Was That Masked Man? The Story of the Lone Ranger.
1976; San Diego and New York: Barnes; London: The Tantivy Press,

Rothel, David.

1981.

Roughead, William. Bad Companions. Edinburgh: W. Green & Son, 1930.
Rousseau, G.

and Roy Porter. Sexual Underworlds of the Enlightenment.

S.

Manchester UP, 1987.
Rowse, A. L. Homosexuals in History. A Study ofAmbivalence in Society, Literature and the Arts.

Dorset Press, 1977.

Ruling, Anna. ‘Welches Interesse hat die Erauenbewegung an der Losung
des homosexuellen Problems?’ J/^Z, VII,

1

(1905), 129-51.

Ruggiero, Guido. The Boundaries of Eros: Sex, Crime and Sexuality in Renaissance Venice. Oxford UP, 1985; 1989.

Rydstrom, Jens.

‘

“Sodomitical Sins are Threefold”: Typologies of Bestiality,

Masturbation and Homosexuality in Sweden, 1880-1950’.
History of Sexuality, IX, 3 Quly 2000), 240-76.

[326]

of the

Works Cited
Sade, Donatien-Alphonse-Fran9ois de. Justine, ou Les Malheurs de la vertu.

1791; Pauvert, 1966.
Sade, D.-A.-F. de. La Philosophic dans le boudoir. 1795; ed. J.-J. Pauvert. La

Musardine, 1997.
Saint-Paul, Georges. Tares et poisons, perversion

& perversite sexiielles: une

enquke medicale sur Vinversion: notes et documents; Le roman d^un invertine: Le proch Wilde: La guerison et la prophylaxie de Vinversion,

par le Dr

Laupts. Pref. E. Zola. Masson, 1896; 2nd ed.: UHo?nosexualite et les types
homosexuels. Vignot, 1910.

Sand, George. Le'lia. 1833; Calmann-Levy, 1958.
Sand, G. La Petite Fadette. 1849; ed. P. Salomon and J. Mallion. Gamier,
1981.

Sand, G. Histoire de ma vie. In Oeuvres autobiographiques. Ed. G. Lubin. II.
Pleiade, 1971.

Sand, G. and Marie Dorval. Correspondance inedite. Ed.

S.

Andre-Maurois.

Gallimard, 1953.
[Saul, Jack.]

The Sins of the Cities of the Plain, or The Recollections of a Mary-

Ann. With Short Essays on Sodomy and Tribadism. London, Leicester
Square, 1881.

Schonholzer, Jakob, ed. Franz Grillparzer. Sein Leben in Tagebuchern, Briefen

und Erinnerungen. Aehren, 1952.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. In Sdmtliche Werke.
Ed. J. Erauenstadt and A. Hiibscher. III. Brockhaus, 1949.

Schrenck-Notzing, Baron Albert von. Die Suggestionstherapie bei krankhaften
Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes, mit besondeixr Berucksichtigung der contraren Sexualempfindung. Stuttgart: Enke, 1892.
Schrijvers, P.

H. Eine medizinische Erkldrung der mannlichen Homosexualitdt

aus der Antike. Amsterdam: Gmner, 1985.
Sennett, Richard. The Fall of Public Man. Cambridge UP, 1977.

Shakespeare, William. Les Sonnets de William Shakespeare. Tr. F.-V. Hugo.
Levy, 1857.

Shand-Tucci, Douglass. Ralph Adams Cram: Life and Architecture. I. U. of

Massachusetts Press, 1995.
Shelley,

Percy Bysshe. ‘A Discourse on the Manners of the Antient

Greeks Relative to the Subject of Love’. July-August 1818; 1931. In
Notopoulos, 404-13.
Shelley, P. B.

The Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley.

Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964.

2 vols.

Ed.

F.

L. Jones.

Works Cited
Showalter, Elaine. Sexual Anarchy. Gender and Culture at the Fin de Sihle.
1990; Virago, 1992.
Signoret, Emmanuel. Le Livre de Vamitie: poemes en vers et en prose. Mirzael

- My nil. Vanier, 1891.
Sinfield, Alan.

The Wilde Centmy: Ejfeminacy, Oscar Wilde and the Queer

Moment. Cassell, 1994.

•

John Maynard Keynes. I. Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920. Mac-

Skidelsky,

millan, 1983.

Smith, Morton. The Secret Gospel. The Discovery and Interpretation of the Secret
Gospel According to Mark. 1973; Aquarian Press, 1985.

Smollett, Tobias. The Adventures of Roderick Random. 1748, Ed. D. Blewett.

Penguin, 1995.
Spencer, Colin. Homosexuality. A History. Eourth Estate, 1995.

Stambolian, George and Elaine Marks, eds. Homosexualities and French Literature.

Cultwal Contexts/Critical Texts. Cornell UP, 1979.

[Stanton, Theodore.] Reminiscences of Rosa Bonheur. Melrose, 1910.
Steakley, James D. The Homosexual Emancipation Movement in Germany. 1975;

Ayer Company, 1993.
Stendhal. Armance, ou quelques scenes d^un salon de Paris en 1827. Ed. J.-J.
Labia. Gamier, 1994.

Stendhal. Oeuvres completes. Geneva: Cercle du Bibliophile, 1968-74.
Stern, Madeleine B. Heads

& Headlines. The Phrenological Fowlers. U. of

Oklahoma, 1971.
Stokes, John. ‘Wilde at Bay: the Diaries of George Ives’. English Literature
in Transition,

1880-1920, XXVI, 3 (1983), 175-86.

Strindberg, August. ‘Nature the Criminal’ (1885). In Getting Married. Tr.

M. Sandbach. Victor Gollancz, 1972.
Strindberg, A. The Cloister. 1891. Tr. M. Sandbach. Seeker

& Warburg, 1969.

Sturgis, Howard O. Belch amber. Constable, 1904.

Summers, Claude J., ed. The Gay and Lesbian Literary Heritage. A Reader’s
Companion to the Writers and their Works, from Antiquity to the Present.

Henry Holt, 1995.
Symonds, John Addington. A Problem in Greek Ethics, being an inquiry into
the phenomenon of Sexual Inversion addressed especially to medical psychologists

and jurists. Privately printed, 1883; 1901; 1908.

Symonds, J. A. A Problem in Modem Ethics, being an inquiry into the phenomenon
of Sexual Inversion. Privately printed, 1891; 1896.

Symonds, J. A. The Memoirs of John Addington Symonds. Ed. P. Grosskurth.
Hutchinson, 1984.

[328]

Works Cited
Symonds, J. A., see Norton, comp.
Tardieu, Ambroise. Etude medico-legale sur les attentats aux moeurs. Bailliere,
1857; ed. G. Vigarello. Grenoble: Millon, 1995.

Tarnovsky, Veniamin. The Sexual Instinct and its Morbid Manifestations from
the

Double Standpoint of Jurisprudence and Psychiatry. 1885;

tr.

W. C.

Costello and A. Allinson. Carrington, 1898.
Taxil, Leo. La Corruption fn-de-siecle. Noirot, c. 1909.

Taylor, Alfred Swaine. The Principles and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence.

Churchill, 1865; ed. T. Stevenson. 2 vols. Churchill, 1883.

Thoinot, Leon-Henri. Attentats aux moeurs et perversion du sens genital. Douin,
1898.

Thompson, C. W. Tes Clefs d’Armance’ and

‘Stendhal connaisseur de

l’“improper” ’. Stendhal Club, 100 (1983) and 114 (1987).
Thrale, Hester Lynch. Thraliana. The Diary of Mrs. Hester Lynch Thrale
(Later Mrs. Piozzi), 1776-1809. Ed. K. C. Balderston. 2 vols. Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1942.
Tickner, Lisa. The Spectacle of Women. Imagery of the Suffrage Campaign,

1907-14. Chatto & Windus, 1987.
Tissot, Samuel-Auguste-Andre-David. VOnanisme: essai sur les maladies produites par la

masturbation. 1758; Gamier, 1905.

Toibm, Colm. Love in a Dark Time. Gay Lives from Wilde to Almodovar.
Picador, 2001.

Tourdes, Gabriel et Edmond Metzquer. Traite de medecine legale theorique et
pratique. Asselin et Houzeau, 1896.

Tmmbach, Randolph. Sex and the Gender Revolution. I. Heterosexuality and
the Third Gender in Enlightenment London. U. of Chicago, 1998.

Turner, Erank M. The Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain. Yale UP, 1981.

Ulrichs, Karl Heinrich. ‘Vier Briefe’. 7/rZ, I (1899). In Katz (1975).

Ulrichs, K. H. Eorschungen iiber das Rathsel der mannmannlichen Liebe. Ed. H.

Kennedy. Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1994.
Ldrichs, K. H. The Riddle of ^Man-Manly Love'': the Pioneering Work on Male

Homosexuality. 2 vols. Tr. M. A.

Lombardi-Nash. Buffalo: Prometheus

Books, 1994.

Van Casselaer, Catherine. Lot's Wife. Lesbian Paris, 1890-1914. Liverpool:
Janus Press, 1986.

[329]

Works Cited
Verlaine, Paul-Marie. Femmes. Hombres. Ed. J.-P. Corsetti and J.-P. Giusto.

Le Livre a venir, 1985.
Vibert, Charles-Albert. Precis de medecine legale. Intro. P. Brouardel. 3rd ed.
Bailliere, 1893.

Vicinus, Martha. Independent Women: Work and Community for Single Women.,

1850-1920. Virago, 1985.
Viel-Castel, Horace de. Memoires sur le regne de Napoleon III. 6 vols.

Chez

tous les libraires, 1883.

Walker, Kenneth. The Physiology of Sex and its Social Implications. 1940; revised,
1954; Pelican, 1965.

Walmsley, Roy. ‘Indecency Between Males and the Sexual Offences Act
1967’. The Criminal Law Review (1978), 400-7.

Watney, Simon. The Art of Duncan Grant. ]ohn Murray, 1990.

Waugh, Alec. The Loom of Youth. Richards, 1917.
Weeks, Jeffrey. Coming Out. Homosexual Politics in Britain^ from the Nineteenth
Century to the Present. Quartet Books, 1977; 1990.

Weeks, J. Sex, Politics and Society. The Regulation of Sexuality Since 1800. 2nd
ed. Longman, 1989; 1994.

Weininger, Otto. Geschlecht und Charakter. Fine prinzipielle Untersuchung.
1903; Munich: Matthes

Wellings, Kaye et

al.

& Seitz, 1980.

Sexual Behaviour in Britain. The National Survey of

Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles. Penguin, 1994.

Wertham, Fredric. Seduction of the Innocent. Museum Press, 1955.
Westphal, Carl Friedrich Otto. ‘Die contrare Sexualempfindung, Symptom
eines nevropatischen (psychopatischen) Zustandes’. Archivfiir Psychiatrie

und Nervenkrankheiten, II, 1 (1870), 73-108. Rpt in Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Ed. A. Westphal. Berlin: Hirschwald, 1892.

Westwood, Gordon. A Minority. A Report on the Life of the Male Homosexual
in

Great Britain. Longmans, 1960.

White, Chris, ed. Nineteenth-Century Writings on Homosexuality. A Sourcebook.
Routledge, 1999.

White, Edmund. States of Desire. Travels in Gay America. 1980; Picador, 1986.
White, Norman. Hopkins. A Literary Biography. Oxford UP, 1992.
Wilde, Oscar. The Complete Letters of Oscar Wilde. Ed. M. Holland and R.
Hart-Davis. Fourth Estate, 2000.

Wilde, O. ‘The Portrait of Mr W. H.’ Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, July
1889.

[330]

Works Cited
Winn, Phillip. Sexualites decadentes chez Jean Lorrain: le heros fin de sexe.
Rodopi, 1997.
Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare Komitee. Jahrbuch fur sexuelle Zwischenstufen,
mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung der Homosexualitdt. Leipzig and Berlin:

Max Spohr, 1899-1923.
Wissenschaftlich-Humanitare Komitee. Was muss das Volk vom dritten Geschlecht wissen? Eine Aufkldrungsschrift. Leipzig:

Spohr, 1901.

Wolfenden, see Home Office.
Wolff, Charlotte.

Magnus Hirschfeld. A

Portrait of a Pioneer in Sexology.

Quartet Books, 1986.

Woods, Gregory. A History of Gay Literature. The Male Tradition. Yale UP,
1998.

Woolf, Virginia. ‘Moments of Being. “Slater’s Pins Have No Points”.’ In A

Haunted House and Other Short Stories. 1944; GraftonBooks, 1982; 1991.
Wullschlager, Jackie. Hans Christian Andersen. The Life of a Storyteller. Allen

Lane, 2000.

‘Xavier Mayne’, see Prime- Stevenson.

Zimmerman, Bonnie,

ed.

Lesbian Histories and Cidtures.

An Encyclopedia.

Garland, 2000.
Zola, Emile. La Curee. 1871; ed. H. Mitterand. Folio, 1981.
Zola, E. Nana. 1880; ed. C. Becker. Gamier, 1994.
Zola, E. Paris. 1898; ed. M. Le Blond. Oeuvres completes. XXXV. Bernouard,

1929.
Zola, E, see Belot and Saint-Paul.

[

33 >]

Index

iJU'bA

biSCYutfJl

/jacU^

-ftnru

Achilles 144, 159, 200, 258

Aristophanes 44

Ackerley, Joe 129, 136, 141, 142, 146

Aristotle 179, 235

ii

tY^iitua

Acton, William 69

Armenia 33

Adam 7

Arsenal football team 269-70

Adelsward Fersen, Baron Jacques d’

Asnieres (France) 161

168, 230

Adler, Alfred 4, 40

Aesthetic Movement 105

AIDS 51, 211, 234
Albania 33

Austen, Jane 14
Australia 110, 159-60, 178

Austria (see also Vienna) 18, 33, 102, 138

Bacchus 245

Albert Victor, Prince (‘Prince Eddy’) 26
Alcibiades 222, 245
Aletrino, Arnold 209

Alexander the Great 144, 174, 245
Alexandria 234
Alger, Horatio
7,

otc^C

Auden, W. H. 142, 225

Adey, More 188

Algeria

/^aju hi

216-17

138, 162

Allen, Clifford

49

Amnesty International 175
Amsterdam 20, 21, 30, 165, 179
Anacreon 222
Andersen, Hans Christian 139, 220^,

Bacon, Francis 152

Baden-Powell, Robert Stephenson

Smyth, Baron 264
Bailey, Paul
Ball,

151-2

Benjamin 72

Balzac, Honore de 2, 45-6, 55, 70, 88,

120, 158, 198, 199, 200, 203, 209,

212, 213, 250, 266-7

Bang, Herman 189
Banks, Leslie 269

Bankes, William,

MP 101

Barbey d’Aurevilly, Jules 96

229
Anglesey, Marquess of see Paget, Henry

Barcelona 30, 60

Anselm, St

Barlow, Maria 115, 142, 153

3

Antinous 204, 245, 247, 248
Antwerp 205
Apollo 244

Barnes, Frederick Jester (Fred) 97, 119

Barney, Natalie Clifford 141, 148, 160,

211

239

Aquinas, Thomas 177

Basilides

Arcangeli 92

Baudelaire, Charles-Pierre 2, 88, 201,

Argis, Henri d’ 209, 210

Aristogiton 200

209, 227
Beccaria, Cesare, Marchese de 176

k,\s^yc.<t£^

ZVY.S^o

?5 ^'

Brand, Adolf 189

Beckford, William 102, 104, 149, 153,

Brazil 27, 151, 169

170, 179

Beddoes, Thomas Lovell 137

Bremen 184

‘Beefsteak Pete’, a.k.a. ‘Man Monster’

Breslau 157

259

Brill,

Beethoven, Ludwig van 145, 228

Abraham 74

British Society for the Study of Sex

Psychology 191-2

Belarus 33

Belgium 27, 40
Belot, Adolphe 203, 206
Benkert, Karl Maria 67, 184, 185, 287
Benson, Arthur 137, 139-40

Bronte, Charlotte 143

Benson, Edward White 69

Berg, Leo 188

Browne, F. W. Stella 192
Browne, Sir Thomas 257
Browning, Oscar 149
Browning, Robert 154
Brummell, George Bryan 96

Bergler, Edmund 77

Brussels 27, 101, 167

Berkman, Alexander 144—5

Buenos Aires 157

brothels 75, 157-8, 165-6

Brouardel, Paul 40, 56, 74

Broughton, Rhoda 202

Benson, Mary (Minnie) (nee Sidgwick)
135, 137

Bentham, Jeremy 106, 177-8, 239, 242

Berlin

8,

30, 60, 157, 160, 166, 167, 223

Bulgaria 33

Berneval (France) 170

Burke, Edmund 178

Bernhardt, Sarah 146, 229

Burne-Jones, Sir Edward Coley 226,

Bernheim, Hippolyte 76

250

Bertz, Eduard 188

Burton, Sir Richard Francis 137, 186

‘Betsy H...’ 103

Butler, Lady Eleanor 116-18, 216

Bibesco, Antoine 48

Butler, Josephine

Bismarck, Otto von 193

Byron, George Gordon 4, 34, 51, 72,

Blake, William

250

134

89, 117, 170, 177, 179, 214, 222,

232

Blank, Siisskind 55

Bloch, Iwan 64, 137, 191

Bloxam, John Francis 219, 238
Bliiher, Hans 198

Cabanis, Georges 45

Blumer, George Alder 286

Cairo 92

Bochechkarov, Nikolai 126-7

California 27, 110

Boissy, Hilaire-Etienne-Octave Rouille,

Cambaceres, Jean-Jacques Regis de 283

Marquis de

Caesar, Julius 174, 181

Cambridge ‘Apostles’ 167, 169
Caminha, Adolfo 169
‘camp’ 96-100
Canada 12, 30, 178

7

Bolton (England) 166

Bonheur, Rosa 244

Bordeaux 157, 172
Boston 251

Candeille, Julie 90

Botelho, Abel 204

Canler, Louis 28-9

Boulogne-sur-mer 102

Capri

Boulton, Ernest (a.k.a. ‘Stella’) 98-101,

Caravaggio, Michelangelo Merisi da

245

168, 226

246

109, 112, 119

Bradford, Rev. Edwin Emmanuel 219,

7,

Carlier, Francois 28, 31, 229

Carpenter, Edward 52, 82, 104-5, 111,

Bradley, Katherine 215

119, 132, 144, 149, 154, 155, 174,

Brahms, Johannes 127

191, 230, 237, 267, 268

[333]

lU-in, m^ioi
31^1

Index
Carson, Edward 36, 257
Casanova de Seingalt, Giacomo 92

Casement, Roger

Condorcet, Jean-Antoine-Nicolas,

38, 157, 172, 261,

291
Casper, Johann Ludwig 52, 53, 55, 58,
60, 61, 64, 181, 249

Castlereagh, Lord (Marquess of

Marquis de 176
Congress of German Jurists 181, 182
Constantinople 22, 217, 223
Cooper, Edith 215
Cooper, James Fenimore 214, 267
Copenhagen 30, 168, 221

*

Londonderry) 38

Cory, Donald Webster 64

Catlin, George 98

Cory, William (ne Johnson) 144

Catullus 264

Cottam, Rev. Samuel E. 218-9, 248
Coubertin, Pierre, Baron de 134
Couperus, Louis 210

‘causes’ of homosexuality 4-10, 42-68

Cavafy, Constantine 136, 173

censorship and self-censorship

1,

137,

203, 209-11, 224-5

Chaeronea 168, 170

Courtenay, Viscount William 102, 153
Cowley, Abraham 93

Charcot, Jean-Martin 71,75

Cowley (England) 252
Cram, Ralph Adams 251

Charles XII of Sw^eden 174

Crisp, Quentin 32, 229, 250

Chartres 26

Crowley, Aleister 58, 250-1

Chateaubriand, Fran^ois-Rene de 85,
109

‘cures’

68-70, 73-9

Custine, Astolphe de 84, 85-8, 90, 95,

no, 119, 225, 227

Chateau-Gontier (France) 207
Chesnut, Mary 108

Custine, Leontine de 87

Chevalier, Julien 54, 63-4, 73

Cyprus 33

Chicago 192
Chopin, Frederic 228

Daniel, EE. 78

Christian, J. 68

Daudet, Alphonse 75

Christianity 233-41
Christie, Agatha

Daughters of Bilitis 192,232
David 237, 239, 240, 242

266

Church, Rev. John 1, 109, 153
Clement of Alexandria 235, 239
Cleveland Street scandal (1890) 26-7,
101, 105, 264

David, Jacques-Louis 110
Davis, Katharine 111

death penalty 22-3, 24, 25

Clifford, William Kingdon

Clinton, Lord Arthur,

David, Hugh 186

237

MP 99-101

Debussy, Claude 228
Delecluze, Etienne-Jean 89

Clogher, Bishop of see Jocelyn, Percy

Delibes, Leo 228

Cobbett, William 114

Delville, Jean

Cockburn, Lord Chief Justice 100

Denmark 33, 102, 220
De Rode, Dr 62

Cocks, Harry 18, 26
Code Civil (1804) 27

245,251

Desgouttes, Franz 179

254-69

Code Penal (1791) 21, 27, 175

detectives, private

Cohen, Alfred J. (Alan Dale) 204
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 112-13, 201

Dickens, Charles 164, 210, 227

Colette 111, 117-18, 148, 231

Diderot, Denis 200-1, 241-2

Collin, Edvard 139, 220, 221

Dio Chrysostom 49

coming out 127-34, 139-42, 154

Dionysus 244

communities and clubs

30,

156-73

‘Community of the Special’ 189

Dickinson, Emily Elizabeth 252

Dodd, Albert 108-9
Donkersloot, N. B. 286

[334]

Index
Donnelly, Francis 107

Fahlberg, Carl Hansen (‘Albert

Hansen’) 188

Dorval, Marie 201

Douglas, Lord Alfred 35, 36, 97, 106,
150, 251

Earoe Islands 33

Douglas, Sir John Sholto, Marquis of

Farrar, Frederic William 201

Queensberry 35, 106, 262

103

‘Fair Eliza’

Ferenczi, Sandor 54

Dowson, Ernest 75

Ferret, Inspector 104

Doyle, Arthur Conan 253, 260-1

Fielding, Henry 18

Doyle, Peter 125, 136

Fields,

Drysdale, George 52

Fievee, Joseph 88-9, 90

Dubarry, Armand 205-6

Fitzgerald, Edward

Duberman, Martin 65

Elandrin, Hippolyte 245

Dublin

Elaubert, Gustave 92

38, 157, 207

W

C. 238

104

Dugas, Ludovic 94

Elorence 89

Dumas pere, Alexandre 204

Fodere, Frangois-Emmanuel 50

Duras, Claire Lechat de Kersaint,

Duchesse de

85, 86, 90

Duras, Clara de 85

Eon thill Abbey 104
Eorel, Auguste-Henri

Forster, E. M.

Foucault, Michel 11, 42, 43, 64, 91,
106, 205

165, 171, 172, 229, 240, 268

Edinburgh 104, 119
Edlestone, John 117

Fourier, Charles 180, 244

France (see also Paris)

Elberskirchen, Joanna 192
electrical therapy

78

Eliot, George 227, 241
Eliot,

T S. 212-3

Ellis,

Henry Havelock 44, 44-5, 47-8,

130-1, 138, 193, 226, 238, 245, 248

172

22, 23, 24, 27,

176, 179-80

Frankel, Hieronymous 55

Frankfurt 132, 133
Frazer, Sir James George

244

Frederick II, the Great 92, 144, 168,
181, 242

Freud, Sigmund

52, 63,79, 82, 96, 102, 128-9,

Ellis, Mike

7,

28-30, 32, 74-5, 102, 138, 164, 167,

Eekhoud, Georges 137, 206, 209
Einstein, Albert 191

136, 142, 152, 202,

209-10, 217, 228, 231, 237

‘Earl Lind’ (a.k.a. ‘Ralph Werther’ and

‘Jennie June’) 64, 65, 84, 159, 163,

192

Eorrest, A, E. 238

9, 44, 54,

76-7, 79-80,

82, 106, 191

Frey, Ludwig 188, 191

Friedlander, Benedict 67, 189-90

Ellmann, Richard 105

Fuller, Margaret

154

Emerson, Ralph Waldo 112
Engels, Friedrich 170

Epicurus 255
Erskine, David,

MP 172

Gaboriau, Emile 253, 260
Ganymede 168, 170, 189
Garland, Judy 229

Eskridge, William 25

Gamier, Paul 71

Eton

Gaskell, Elizabeth 143

149, 210, 266

Eulenburg, Prince Philipp zu 193

Gautier, Theophile 46, 55, 198

Ezekiel 239

gay rights 175-94

Genoa 60
Eaan (Holland) 20

Georgia 33

Eaderman, Lillian 232

Gerber, Henry 192

[335]

Index
Gericault, Theodore 110

Haan, Jacob Israel de 209

Germany {see also Berlin) 7, 30, 32-3,

Hadrian, Emperor 248

52, 102, 167, 178-9, 185, 188-91,

Hafiz 166-7, 213, 226, 264

193

Halifax (England) 115

Gesner, Johann Matthias 299

Hall, Radclyffe 61, 154, 160, 193, 209,

Gibbings, Thomas 100

232

Gibbon, Edward 102

Hallam, Arthur Henry 212

Gibraltar 33

Halsey, Anthony 108-9

Gide, Andre

7, 74,

Hamann, Johann Georg 299
Hamblar, Edward 104
Hamilton, Mary 18

131, 132, 134, 154,

162, 183, 214

Gide, Madeleine (nee Rondeaux) 74,

Hammond, James 108, 109
Hammond, William 44, 69

131
Gilbert, Sue 252
Gilbert, W. S.

Harden, Maximilian 170, 193
Hardy, Thomas 199-200, 232

105

Gillette, William

264

Giraud, Nicolo 51

Harmodius 200

Girodet-Trioson, Anne-Louis 90-1,

Harris, Erank 36, 141

no, 204

Harrow 106

Gladstone, William Ewart 244

Hartland, Claude 65, 66, 75

Glasgow 104

Heber, Richard

Glatigny, Albert 140

Heine, Heinrich 94-5, 97, 213, 227

MP 101

Gloeden, Wilhelm, Baron von 154

Hemingway, Ernest 114

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von

Hensher, Philip 152

1,

93,

178, 203, 209, 228

Hephaestion 245

Gogol, Nikolai 68-9, 145

Herder, Johann Gottfried 299

Goncourt, Edmond de 75, 161,
213-4

Herelle, Georges 63, 66

Gospels 177, 235, 239, 240, 241, 249,
250

Herodotus 43, 50, 267

Gosse, Edmund 106, 128, 137, 154

Hesse, Hermann 191

Gothenburg 159
Gounod, Charles 228
Gower, LoM Ronald 104
Grahame, Kenneth 217

Hichens, Robert S. 105

Hermes 245, 251
Herzog, Alfred 64

Himmler, Heinrich 10
Hippocrates 40, 43, 44
Plirschfeld, Magnus 48-9, 58, 61, 64,

Grainger, Walter 36

67, 79, 82, 94, 129, 185, 186,

Grant, Duncan 251

188-94, 209, 226, 230, 233

Gray, Thomas 137

Hitler Youth 189

Grillparzer, Eranz 188

Hobhouse, John Cam 89
Hocquenghem, Guy 64
Holland {see also Amsterdam) 20, 23, 33,
151, 185, 286
Holland, Vyvyan 171
Homer 144, 244

Guernsey 33
Gunn, Thom 225
Gustav III of Sweden 181

Hooker, Evelyn 70
Hoover, J. Edgar 170, 268

Greece, ancient

1, 6,

18, 51, 70, 91, 92,

94, 113, 141, 178-9, 218, 244

Greece, modern

8,

51

Gribble, Leonard 269
Griesinger, Wilhelm 55

Homo, Hippolyte 207

[336]

Index
Hopkins, Gerard Manley 211, 247, 251,

Jopling, Louise 37

Joux, Otto de (Otto Rudolf Podjukl)

252

Horace 179, 244, 264
Hornung, Ernest William 266

Jowett, Benjamin 244

Hossli, Heinrich 70, 178-9, 181, 191

Judas 248

Housman, Laurence

Justi,

57-8, 62, 185, 191, 249

154, 191

Hughes, Thomas 250

Hugo, Victor-Marie

Hulme (England)

Carl 94

Juvenal 143, 235

159, 226, 227

Kafka, Eranz 224, 230

166

Humphreys, Laud 64
Hungary 33, 54, 232
Huysmans, Joris-Karl 213,226
Hyde, H. Montgomery 257

Kains-Jackson, Charles 230
Kakikoski, Hilda Maria 135

Karadek, Jan 226
Karl August, Duke

1

Mno 64

hypnosis therapy 75-7

Karlen,

Ida, Mount

Kenner, Josef 228

Katz, Jonathan 107

170

Iffland, August Wilhelm

96

Kertbeny see Benkert, Karl Maria

India 25

Keynes, John Maynard 172

Inslip, brothel owner

208
Institute for Sexual Research 193

Kiernan, James 69, 77, 286

International Society for Sex Research

Kinsey report (1948) 81, 185, 190
Kirchner, Raphael 49

Kingsley, Charles 250

82
Ireland 33, 38

Kirkup, James 236, 246

Isherwood, Christopher 143, 217

Krafft-Ebing, Richard von 52, 57, 58,

Isle of

Man 3 3

59, 60-1, 64, 65, 66, 69-70, 72, 76,
79, 129, 130, 147, 171, 230

Italy 7, 8, 27, 52, 60, 89, 151, 162, 185,

Krueg, Julius 286'

232
Ives,

George Cecil

Krupp, Friedrich Alfred 168, 291
Kupffer, Elisar von 168,230
Kuzmin, Mikhail 129, 158, 169, 206,
232

168, 192

Jacob, Max 246-7
Jaeger, Gustav 67, 174, 191

James I (VI of Scotland), King 112, 240
James, Henry 148, 224

Jersey 33

Labouchere Amendment (1886) 20-1,
34, 38, 265
Ladies of Llangollen 1 16-18, 216
La Grange, Edouard de 86, 88

Jesus Christ 235-50

Lamb, Lady Caroline 116

Jefferson, Thomas 23

‘Jenny June’ see ‘Earl Lind’

Jocelyn, Percy (Bishop of Clogher) 38,
101, 104, 200

L’Aquila (Italy) 184

Larousse, Pierre 44, 51, 53

John, St 240, 241, 242, 245-6, 249

Las Palmas 157

John the Baptist 246
Johnson, Samuel 104

Laurent, Raymond 171

Johnson, William see Cory

JONAH (Jews Offering New
Alternatives to Homosexuality) 42

Jonathan 150, 237, 239, 240, 242
Jones, Sir William 143

Laupts see Saint-Paul, Dr
Lauvergne, Hubert 55, 70
Lawrence, D. H. 210, 231

Lawrence,

T E. 152

Lear, Edward 137

Le Baillif de la Riviere 50

[337I

2

Index
Leblanc, Maurice 266

Mann, Thomas

Leclercq, Theodore 88-9, 97

Mansfield, Katherine 69

Lees, Edith 130-1, 192

Mantegazza, Paolo 81

Leeves, Edward 162

‘Mapah, Le’ (Simon Ganneau) 244
Maranon, Gregorio 185, 286

Le Gallienne, Richard 144
17-39
Legrand du Saulle, Henri 112
legal persecution

149, 190, 191, 231

Marie-Antoinette, Queen 143

,

Lisbon 157, 204

Mark, St 235, 238, 242
Marlowe, Christopher 241
Marseille 217
Martial 143, 235
Martineau, Louis 4
Marx, Heinrich 156, 184
Marx, Karl 170
Massenet, Jules 228
Mattachine Society 193
Matthew, St 239, 240
Matthews, Charles Skinner 4, 34-5

Lister, Anne

Maupassant, Guy de 161

Leland, Charles 191

Leonardo da Vinci 9, 80
Lesbos 141
Letinois, Lucien

249

Lilith 7

Liman, Carl

56, 58

Lincoln, Abraham 107

Lincoln (England) 251
Lind, Jenny 134, 220, 229

115, 117, 142, 143, 144,

Locarno 168

Max, Louis 78
Mayhew, Henry 164
McCosker, Edward 107
McGlory, Billy 154

Lockhart, John Gibson 116

McNally, Terrence 236

Lockwood, Sir Erank 38
Lombroso, Cesare 50, 214

Mecke, Gunter 224

London 8, 25, 35, 97, 98-101, 102, 103,

Meerscheidt-Hiillessem, Leopold von

153, 154, 156, 167, 175
literature

136-8, 198-232

Lithuania 33

medical approaches 40-83
30, 80

114, 143, 151, 157-8, 159, 161-2,
163, 167, 172, 219, 229, 234, 264

Lorrain, Jean (Paul Duval) 245

Louys, Pierre 231, 232

Lucian 235

Ludwig II of Bavaria

168, 228

Melville, Herman 110, 199, 206, 224,

259
Mendes, Catulle 161, 210, 250
Merrill, George 104, 154
Merrill, Stuart 188

‘Luz Erauman’ 205

Mery, Joseph 197, 204, 206, 209
Meyers, J effrey 1 5
Michea, Claude-Fran^ois 54

Lydston, G. Frank 78

Michelangelo

Luke, St 240, 250
Luxembourg 27

Lyon 166

11, 72, 80, 144, 174, 198,

212, 226
Milles, Carl 189

Macdonald, Sir Hector Archibald 291
Macfadden, Bernarr 134
Mackay, John Henry 209

Millthorpe (England) 104

Milne, A. A. 143,217
Mitchell, Alice 202

xMadrid 30, 185

Moldau, Siegfried 145

Magnan, Valentin 71

Moldova 33

Mallarme, Stephane 226

Moliere (Jean-Baptiste Poquelin) 204

Mallock, W. H. 105, 244

Moll, Albert 30, 48, 58, 63, 69, 71, 72,

Manchester 33, 79, 166
Mann, Heinrich 191

Mollier’s Circus 227

75, 80-2, 147, 171, 179, 197, 227

[338]

Index
St,

H6iM

Monaco 27

Paris 7, 8, 28, 30, 31, 51, 60, 97, 151,

Monet, Claude 161

157, 158, 159, 160-1, 164, 166, 169,
171, 175, 179-80, 255-6

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat,

Baron de 176

Park, Frederick (a.k.a. ‘Fanny’) 98-101,
109, 112, 119

Montesquiou, Robert de 226
Monticelli, Adolphe 226

Parkhurst, Rev. Charles 165

Moreau, Gustave 250

Parmenides 43

Morison, Sir Alexander 52

Paschal, convicted sodomite 243

Moritz, Karl Philipp 53

Pater, Walter 92, 244

Morris, William 226

Patroclus 144, 200

Morselli, Enrico 71

Paul, St 133, 233, 234, 235, 240, 243

Moscow 30

Paxton, D. (‘Screw’) 162

Mother Clap 158

Pearce, defendant 26

Muller, Johannes von 291

Peirce, James Millis 185

Munich

Peladan, Josephin 206

181-2, 189

Murdoch, Iris 121

Pepys, Samuel

Murray, F. E. (‘A. Newman’) 219

Perie, Hilaire 91

Musil, Robert 231

Persia 7

Musset, Alfred de 227, 228

Petain, Philippe, Marechal 32

3

Petronius 143

Nabokov, Vladimir 33
Naples 7, 30, 93, 96, 143, 204, 209, 222,
223, 255

Philadelphia 165, 259
Philip II (of Macedonia) 168

Philo Judaeus (Philo of Alexandria)

Napoleon I 22, 26, 88
Nazis

10, 32-3, 83, 193

Neuschwanstein 168

234, 235
Pilate, Pontius

Newlove, clerk 27

New York 7, 8, 30, 51, 103, 134, 158,

235

Platen, Count von 94-6, 97, 139, 167,
181, 188, 227

Plato 44, 53, 80, 174, 177, 181, 235,

163, 165, 169, 172-3, 259, 267

245, 249

Nice 193

Plutarch 144

Nicholson, John Gambril 219

Poe, Edgar Allan 254-60, 266-7

Nicolson, Harold 130

Ponsonby, Sarah 116-18,216

Norton, Rictor 102, 158

Pontoppidan, Knud 286

Nussey, Ellen 143

pornography 58, 206-8
Portugal 27, 33, 157, 204

O’Brien, M. D. 105

‘Posh’, friend of E. Fitzgerald

‘Order of Chaeronea’ 168, 192

Pougy, Liane de (Marie Chassaigne)

Orion 258
Orpheus 244

Praxiteles 245

104

211

Oswald, Richard 189

Prevost, Marcel 231

Ovid 143, 258
Oxford 141, 167, 218-9

Prime-Stevenson, Edward Irenaeus

Paget, Henry (5th Marquess of

prostitution 57, 74-5, 142, 157-9,

(‘Xavier Mayne’) 129, 185-6, 191,

209, 226, 227, 228, 231-2, 248, 276

162-4

Anglesey) 97

Palermo 60

Protheroe, Edward,

[339]

MP 101

Index
Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph 245

Saadi 179

Proust, Marcel 2, 40, 48, 106, 141, 145,

Sackville-West, Vita 130

157, 171, 212, 225, 227-8

Sade, Donatien-Alphonse-Frangois,

Marquis de 176, 180, 243

Prussia 18, 22, 74
Pyle, Howard

217-18

St Petersburg
«

60, 127, 151, 157, 158,

Saint-Paul, Georges (‘Dr Laupts’)

62-3, 66, 70, 73-4

Quackenbos, John Duncan 77

Sainte-Barbe, Edward 87, 88

Queensberry, Marquis of see Douglas,
^

1,

166-7

Pythagoras 235

Sand, George 84, 199, 200, 201

Sir John Sholto

San Francisco

157

8, 30,

Rachilde (Marguerite EyTnery) 214, 226

San Sebastian 157

Raffalovich, Marc-Andre 10, 64, 71,

Sappho 140, 150, 170, 203, 212
Sarto, Andrea Del 246
Sasanoya, M. 226

215, 246

‘Ralph Werther’ see ‘Earl Lind’

Ramdohr, Eriedrich Wilhelm Basilius
von 70, 140-1, 178

Saul, Jack 103, 163, 171

Rau, Hans 188

Schlosser,

Raucourt, Mile (Eran9oise Clairien)

Schmidtlein, Eduard 139

160

Sayers, Dorothy L. 266

EC. 88

Schnitzler, Arthur 191

Ravenna 89
Reading (England) 66
religion 233-52
Renan, Ernest 241, 245-6

Schober, Franz von 228

Schopenhauer, Arthur 183
Schreber, Daniel Paul 106

Schrenck-Notzing, Baron Albert von

Renoir, Auguste 161

75, 78

Richardson, Samuel 117

Schubert, Franz 228

Ricketts, Charles 104

Schweitzer, Jean Baptiste von 291

rights see gay rights

Scientific and Humanitarian Committee

Rilke, Rainer Maria

186, 188-9, 190, 191-2, 193

191

Rimbaud, Arthur 2, 27, 146, 163, 170,
199, 213, 226, 229, 248, 252

Scott, Walter 213

Scott Moncrieff, Charles Kenneth 106
Searight, Kenneth 172

Riom (Erance) 179
Rivers, W, C. 64

secret signs and tokens 13, 142-52,

Robin Hood 217-8, 249
Rolfe, Frederick William (‘Baron

Serbia 33

213-5

Corvo’) 162, 167-8, 205, 214, 222,

Servaes, Dr 59

229, 247

Seward, Anna 116

Romania 7, 27, 33

Sgricci, Tommaso 89-90, 97

Rome 22, 92, 151, 153, 167

Shakespeare, William 72, 112, 113,
129, 145, 212, 213, 226, 227,

Rosanov, Vasili 250
Rosebery, Archibald Philip Primrose,

Sheffield (England)

Earl of 262
Rossetti, Christina

Shannon, Charles 104

232

Shelley, Edward

104, 105, 153

105

Ruling, Anna 192

Shelley, Percy Bysshe

Russia {see also St Petersburg) 19, 30,

Sicily 95, 96, 217

151, 225

Sidgwick, Henry 136

[340]

113, 177, 178

Index
Signoret, Emmanuel 230-1, 249

286

Silva, Adelino

Symonds, John Addington

52, 61, 64,

65, 104, 106, 134, 136, 137, 142,

Simcox, Edith 227

148, 149, 154, 162, 185, 191, 229,

slang and argots 150, 161, 168, 243

230, 237-8

Symons, Arthur 167-8
Syracuse (Sicily) 96

Sloan, James 173
Slova, Alfred 62

Smollett, Tobias 113, 114, 178, 227
‘Societe des Emiles’ 176

Taillandier, Louise

Society for Human Rights 192

Tait, Lucy

Socrates 11, 174, 179, 198, 212, 222,

Tamassia, Arrigo 286

242, 244, 245, 249
Sofia 157

Solomon, Simeon 149, 171, 226, 251

161

135

Taormina see Sicily
Tardieu, Ambroise 46-7, 70, 75, 112,
204, 205

Somerset, Lord Arthur 27, 101-2

Tarnovsky, Veniamin 158, 286

Soranus 43

Taylor, Alfred 52, 257
Taylor, Bayard

‘Sotadic Zone’ 186

Tchaikovsky, Alexandra 126

Soviet Union 33

Spain 12, 18, 19, 27, 30, 185, 193

164, 228

Spohr, Max 188

Tennyson, Alfred, Lord 211-12, 226
Thickbroom, Ernest 163

Springfield (US) 107

T 37

Stein, Charlotte von

203

Stendhal 88, 90, 125, 135, 200, 242
Stevenson, Robert Louis 224
Stiller, Mauritz

Tchaikovsky, Modest 126
Tchaikovsky, Pyotr Ilyich 126-7, 157,

Speed, Joshua 107

Stead, W.

215-16

Taylor, Jerry 173

South Africa 110

189

Stockholm 159

Thoinot, Leon-Henri 43

Thomas, St 243
Thompson, George (‘Greenhorn’) 203,
206, 259
Thoreau, Henry David 264

Thrale, Hester Lynch (Mrs Piozzi) 104,

Stoddard, Charles Warren 206, 216

117, 118

Stoddart, J. M. 261

Tiberius, Emperor 168, 258

Stonewall riots (1969) 180

Tibullus 226

Stout, Rex

266

Tiresias 144, 212

Strachey, Lytton 129
Straight, barrister

99

Strassmann, Dr Fritz 62
Strauss, David Friedrich 241

Strindberg, August 166

Tissot, Samuel 51

Toibm, Colm 211, 225
tolerance of homosexuality 39, 85,

88-9, 90-1, 102-5, 111, 119, 152

Sturgis, Howard Overing 210, 214, 226

Toronto 30
Toulouse 157

submersion, concept of 110

Thulouse-I.autrec, Henri de 161

Suetonius 143, 258

Tovote, Heinz 73

surgical cures

Sweden

78-9

159, 189

Trieste 92

Troubridge, Una 154

Swinburne, Algernon Charles 201, 226,
227

Troyes 63

Switzerland 178, 179

Turing, Alan 79

Sydney 159-60

Turkey 7, 35, 152

Turin 157

d) Ni>

Index
Ulrichs, Karl Heinrich 10, 48, 53, 58,
67, 73, 127-8, 131-4, 139, 142, 154,

168, 170, 171, 179, 181-2, 183-4,
185, 192, 211, 233, 286, 287

Ulzen, Wilhelm 133

United States of America 20, 21, 23, 25,

Wesley de Cobain, Edward Samuel MP
38

Westphal, Carl Friedrich Otto 42, 55,
59, 72-3

Westwood, Gordon 74
MTiistler, James Abbott McNeill 226,

114, 151, 158-9, 167, 168, 202, 207,

227
White, Edmund 65, 159

234, 259, 267

Whitman, Walt 64, 114, 125, 134-5,

27, 32, 33, 44, 52, 78, 98, 103, l07,

136, 144, 154, 156, 171, 172-3, 188,

Van Dine, S. S. see Wright, V411ard
Huntington
Varnhagen von Ense, Rahel 86
Veck, clergyman 27
Veidt, Conrad 189
Venice 95, 162, 171, 217

203, 206, 226, 237, 245

Wikner, Carl Pontus 135, 136
Wilbrandt, Adolf von 300

Wilde, Constance 131
Wilde, Oscar 2-3, 6, 17, 20, 35-8, 39,
64, 66, 75, 96, 105, 119, 131, 141,

Verdenal, Jean 212

142, 150, 152, 159, 170, 188, 200,

Vere Street scandal (1810) 19-20, 34,

207, 215, 238, 248-9, 251, 257, 261,

102, 110, 265

Verlaine, Paul-Marie 2, 27-8, 40, 146,
163, 199, 206, 209, 210, 212, 213,

226, 229, 248, 249, 252

Vernet, Horace 262
Vibert, Charles 56
Victoria, Queen 3, 120

Vienna 60, 96, 166, 167
Villette,

Charles-Michel, Marquis de

175, 176
Villiers,

George (Duke of Buckingham)

240
Virgil 144, 244, 249

Vivien, Renee 141, 213
Voltaire (Fran 9 ois-Marie Arouet) 92,

176
Voyer, Louis-Marcel 29

262
Wilder, Billy 260

William of Orange 174
Willy (Henry Gauthier- Villars) 111-2
Wilson, James Maurice 4

Winchester School 106
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim 91-4,
142, 178, 181, 244
Winthrop, Theodore 215

Wister, Owen 216

Withers, Thomas Jefferson 108

Wolfenden, Sir John 100
Woolf, Virginia 214
236
Woolrych, Humphry
Wordsworth, William 116
Worthing (England) 38, 219
Wright, Willard Huntington (Van

W

Dine) 266

Wagner, Richard 112, 167, 228
Walker, Kenneth 46, 50
Walmsley, Roy 34

Waugh, Alec 232
Weber, Carl Maria von 149
Weininger, Otto 129
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of
116

‘Xavier Mayne’ see Prime-Stevenson,

Edward
Yeats,

W

B. 37, 38

Zacchias, Paolo 44

Zinzendorf, Ludwig von 244
Zola, Alexandrine 161

Wellington School 69

Zola, Emile 62, 158, 161, 188, 203, 250

Wells, H. G. 76

Zschokke, Heinrich 179

Wertham, Fredric 267

Zurich 157

'll'

1

1

*-

BAKER & TAYLOR

Praise for Graham Robb’s Rimbaud

“Superb
the single best work to read about this haunting
and haunted poet.”
—Richard Howard, New York Times Book Review
.

.

.

“Robb’s is a powerfully revisionist Rimbaud, written with
exhilarating lucidity and historical acumen.”

—Hilary Spurling, Daily Telegraph
“Wit, elegance and thoroughness characterize this book
[A] fine new critical biography.”

—Washington Post

“The book is a deftly written, often brilliant performance;
the flair with which [Robb] relates the man’s life makes
his book the more satisfying.”
—The New Republic
.

.

.

“Scholarly, humane and above all marvelously entertaining.”

—The Guardian
“Robb tells this coruscating and enigmatic life story with
intelligence, compassion, and a healthy dose of skepticism.
Robb’s biography searches long and hard, and brings
back a compellingly human reading of this mysterious
.

.

.

—Literary Review

figure.”

Rimbaud was selected as a New York Times
Best Book of the Year.

GAY STUDIES
ISBN 0-393-02038-X
5 2 6 9 5

9

780393 020380

www.wwnorton.com
W. W. NORTON

NEW YORK LONDON
•

