i'd never given much thought to how i would die -
though i'd had reason enough in the last few months
- but even if i had, i would not have imagined it like
this.

i stared without breathing across the long room, into
the dark eyes of the hunter, and he looked pleasantly
back at me.

surely it was a good way to die, in the place of
someone else, someone i loved. noble, even. that
ought to count for something.

i knew that if i'd never gone to forks, i wouldn't be
facing death now. but, terrified as i was, i couldn't
bring myself to regret the decision. when life offers
you a dream so far beyond any of your expectations,
it's not reasonable to grieve when it comes to an end.

the hunter smiled in a friendly way as he sauntered
forward to kill me.

2page twilight - stephanie meyer
 first sight

my mother drove me to the airport with the windows
rolled down. it was seventy-five degrees in phoenix,
the sky a perfect, cloudless blue. i was wearing my
favorite shirt - sleeveless, white eyelet lace; i was
wearing it as a farewell gesture. my carry-on item was
a parka.

in the olympic peninsula of northwest washington
state, a small town named forks exists under a near-
constant cover of clouds. it rains on this
inconsequential town more than any other place in
the united states of america. it was from this town
and its gloomy, omnipresent shade that my mother
escaped with me when i was only a few months old. it
was in this town that i'd been compelled to spend a
month every summer until i was fourteen. that was
the year i finally put my foot down; these past three
summers, my dad, charlie, vacationed with me in
california for two weeks instead.

it was to forks that i now exiled myself- an action
that i took with great horror. i detested forks.

i loved phoenix. i loved the sun and the blistering
heat. i loved the vigorous, sprawling city.

"bella," my mom said to me - the last of a thousand
times - before i got on the plane. "you don't have to
do this."

3page twilight - stephanie meyer
my mom looks like me, except with short hair and
laugh lines. i felt a spasm of panic as i stared at her
wide, childlike eyes. how could i leave my loving,
erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? of
course she had phil now, so the bills would probably
get paid, there would be food in the refrigerator, gas
in her car, and someone to call when she got lost, but
still

"i want to go," i lied. i'd always been a bad liar, but i'd
been saying this lie so frequently lately that it
sounded almost convincing now.

"tell charlie i said hi."

"i will."

"i'll see you soon," she insisted. "you can come home
whenever you want - i'll come right back as soon as
you need me."

but i could see the sacrifice in her eyes behind the
promise.

"don't worry about me," i urged. "it'll be great. i love
you, mom." she hugged me tightly for a minute, and
then i got on the plane, and she was gone.

it's a four-hour flight from phoenix to seattle, another
hour in a small plane up to port angeles, and then an
hour drive back down to forks. flying doesn't bother
me; the hour in the car with charlie, though, i was a
little worried about.

charlie had really been fairly nice about the whole
thing. he seemed genuinely pleased that i was coming
to live with him for the first time with any degree of
4page twilight - stephanie meyer
permanence. he'd already gotten me registered for
high school and was going to help me get a car.

but it was sure to be awkward with charlie. neither
of us was what anyone would call verbose, and i
didn't know what there was to say regardless. i knew
he was more than a little confused by my decision -
like my mother before me, i hadn't made a secret of
my distaste for forks. when i landed in port angeles,
it was raining. i didn't see it as an omen - just
unavoidable. i'd already said my goodbyes to the sun.
charlie was waiting for me with the cruiser. this i
was expecting, too. charlie is police chief swan to the
good people of forks. my primary motivation behind
buying a car, despite the scarcity of my funds, was
that i refused to be driven around town in a car with
red and blue lights on top. nothing slows down traffic
like a cop.

charlie gave me an awkward, one-armed hug when i
stumbled my way off the plane.

"it's good to see you, bells," he said, smiling as he
automatically caught and steadied me. "you haven't
changed much. how's rene?"

"mom's fine. it's good to see you, too, dad." i wasn't
allowed to call him charlie to his face.

i had only a few bags. most of my arizona clothes
were too permeable for washington. my mom and i
had pooled our resources to supplement my winter
wardrobe, but it was still scanty. it all fit easily into
the trunk of the cruiser.

5page twilight - stephanie meyer
"i found a good car for you, really cheap," he
announced when we were strapped in.

"what kind of car?" i was suspicious of the way he
said "good car for you" as opposed to just "good car."

"well, it's a truck actually, a chevy."

"where did you find it?"

"do you remember billy black down at la push?" la
push is the tiny indian reservation on the coast.

"no."

"he used to go fishing with us during the summer,"
charlie prompted. that would explain why i didn't
remember him. i do a good job of blocking painful,
unnecessary things from my memory.

"he's in a wheelchair now," charlie continued when i
didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he
offered to sell me his truck cheap."

"what year is it?" i could see from his change of
expression that this was the question he was hoping i
wouldn't ask.

"well, billy's done a lot of work on the engine - it's
only a few years old, really."

i hoped he didn't think so little of me as to believe i
would give up that easily. "when did he buy it?"

"he bought it in 1984, i think."

"did he buy it new?"

6page twilight - stephanie meyer
"well, no. i think it was new in the early sixties - or
late fifties at the earliest," he admitted sheepishly.

"ch - dad, i don't really know anything about cars. i
wouldn't be able to fix it if anything went wrong, and i
couldn't afford a mechanic"

"really, bella, the thing runs great. they don't build
them like that anymore."

the thing, i thought to myself it had possibilities -
as a nickname, at the very least.

"how cheap is cheap?" after all, that was the part i
couldn't compromise on.

"well, honey, i kind of already bought it for you. as a
homecoming gift." charlie peeked sideways at me with
a hopeful expression.

wow. free.

"you didn't need to do that, dad. i was going to buy
myself a car."

"i don't mind. i want you to be happy here." he was
looking ahead at the road when he said this. charlie
wasn't comfortable with expressing his emotions out
loud. i inherited that from him. so i was looking
straight ahead as i responded.

"that's really nice, dad. thanks. i really appreciate
it." no need to add that my being happy in forks is an
impossibility. he didn't need to suffer along with me.
and i never looked a free truck in the mouth - or
engine.

7page twilight - stephanie meyer
"well, now, you're welcome," he mumbled,
embarrassed by my thanks. we exchanged a few more
comments on the weather, which was wet, and that
was pretty much it for conversation. we stared out
the windows in silence. it was beautiful, of course; i
couldn't deny that. everything was green: the trees,
their trunks covered with moss, their branches
hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with
ferns. even the air filtered down greenly through the
leaves.

it was too green - an alien planet.

eventually we made it to charlie's. he still lived in the
small, two-bedroom house that he'd bought with my
mother in the early days of their marriage. those were
the only kind of days their marriage had - the early
ones. there, parked on the street in front of the house
that never changed, was my new - well, new to me -
truck. it was a faded red color, with big, rounded
fenders and a bulbous cab. to my intense surprise, i
loved it. i didn't know if it would run, but i could see
myself in it. plus, it was one of those solid iron affairs
that never gets damaged - the kind you see at the
scene of an accident, paint unscratched, surrounded
by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed.

"wow, dad, i love it! thanks!" now my horrific day
tomorrow would be just that much less dreadful. i
wouldn't be faced with the choice of either walking
two miles in the rain to school or accepting a ride in
the chief's cruiser.

"i'm glad you like it," charlie said gruffly,
embarrassed again. it took only one trip to get all my

8page twilight - stephanie meyer
stuff upstairs. i got the west bedroom that faced out
over the front yard. the room was familiar; it had
been belonged to me since i was born. the wooden
floor, the light blue walls, the peaked ceiling, the
yellowed lace curtains around the window -

these were all a part of my childhood. the only
changes charlie had ever made were switching the
crib for a bed and adding a desk as i grew. the desk
now held a secondhand computer, with the phone
line for the modem stapled along the floor to the
nearest phone jack. this was a stipulation from my
mother, so that we could stay in touch easily. the
rocking chair from my baby days was still in the
corner.

there was only one small bathroom at the top of the
stairs, which i would have to share with charlie. i
was trying not to dwell too much on that fact.

one of the best things about charlie is he doesn't
hover. he left me alone to unpack and get settled, a
feat that would have been altogether impossible for
my mother. it was nice to be alone, not to have to
smile and look pleased; a relief to stare dejectedly out
the window at the sheeting rain and let just a few
tears escape. i wasn't in the mood to go on a real
crying jag. i would save that for bedtime, when i
would have to think about the coming morning.

forks high school had a frightening total of only
three hundred and fifty-seven - now fifty-eight -
students; there were more than seven hundred people
in my junior class alone back home. all of the kids
here had grown up together - their grandparents had

9page twilight - stephanie meyer
been toddlers together. i would be the new girl from
the big city, a curiosity, a freak. maybe, if i looked like
a girl from phoenix should, i could work this to my
advantage. but physically, i'd never fit in anywhere. i
should be tan, sporty, blond - a volleyball player, or
a cheerleader, perhaps - all the things that go with
living in the valley of the sun.

instead, i was ivory-skinned, without even the excuse
of blue eyes or red hair, despite the constant
sunshine. i had always been slender, but soft
somehow, obviously not an athlete; i didn't have the
necessary hand-eye coordination to play sports
without humiliating myself - and harming both
myself and anyone else who stood too close.

when i finished putting my clothes in the old pine
dresser, i took my bag of bathroom necessities and
went to the communal bathroom to clean myself up
after the day of travel. i looked at my face in the
mirror as i brushed through my tangled, damp hair.
maybe it was the light, but already i looked sallower,
unhealthy. my skin could be pretty - it was very
clear, almost translucent-looking - but it all
depended on color. i had no color here.

facing my pallid reflection in the mirror, i was forced
to admit that i was lying to myself. it wasn't just
physically that i'd never fit in. and if i couldn't find a
niche in a school with three thousand people, what
were my chances here?

i didn't relate well to people my age. maybe the truth
was that i didn't relate well to people, period. even my
mother, who i was closer to than anyone else on the

10 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
planet, was never in harmony with me, never on
exactly the same page. sometimes i wondered if i was
seeing the same things through my eyes that the rest
of the world was seeing through theirs. maybe there
was a glitch in my brain. but the cause didn't matter.
all that mattered was the effect. and tomorrow would
be just the beginning. i didn't sleep well that night,
even after i was done crying. the constant whooshing
of the rain and wind across the roof wouldn't fade into
the background. i pulled the faded old quilt over my
head, and later added the pillow, too. but i couldn't
fall asleep until after midnight, when the rain finally
settled into a quieter drizzle.

thick fog was all i could see out my window in the
morning, and i could feel the claustrophobia creeping
up on me. you could never see the sky here; it was
like a cage.

breakfast with charlie was a quiet event. he wished
me good luck at school. i thanked him, knowing his
hope was wasted. good luck tended to avoid me.
charlie left first, off to the police station that was his
wife and family. after he left, i sat at the old square
oak table in one of the three unmatching chairs and
examined his small kitchen, with its dark paneled
walls, bright yellow cabinets, and white linoleum
floor. nothing was changed. my mother had painted
the cabinets eighteen years ago in an attempt to bring
some sunshine into the house. over the small
fireplace in the adjoining handkerchief-sized family
room was a row of pictures. first a wedding picture of
charlie and my mom in las vegas, then one of the
three of us in the hospital after i was born, taken by a

11 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
helpful nurse, followed by the procession of my school
pictures up to last year's. those were embarrassing to
look at - i would have to see what i could do to get
charlie to put them somewhere else, at least while i
was living here.

it was impossible, being in this house, not to realize
that charlie had never gotten over my mom. it made
me uncomfortable.

i didn't want to be too early to school, but i couldn't
stay in the house anymore. i donned my jacket -
which had the feel of a biohazard suit - and headed
out into the rain.

it was just drizzling still, not enough to soak me
through immediately as i reached for the house key
that was always hidden under the eaves by the door,
and locked up. the sloshing of my new waterproof
boots was unnerving. i missed the normal crunch of
gravel as i walked. i couldn't pause and admire my
truck again as i wanted; i was in a hurry to get out of
the misty wet that swirled around my head and clung
to my hair under my hood.

inside the truck, it was nice and dry. either billy or
charlie had obviously cleaned it up, but the tan
upholstered seats still smelled faintly of tobacco,
gasoline, and peppermint. the engine started quickly,
to my relief, but loudly, roaring to life and then idling
at top volume. well, a truck this old was bound to
have a flaw. the antique radio worked, a plus that i
hadn't expected.

finding the school wasn't difficult, though i'd never
been there before. the school was, like most other
12 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
things, just off the highway. it was not obvious that it
was a school; only the sign, which declared it to be
the forks high school, made me stop. it looked like a
collection of matching houses, built with maroon-
colored bricks. there were so many trees and shrubs
i couldn't see its size at first. where was the feel of
the institution? i wondered nostalgically. where were
the chain-link fences, the metal detectors?

i parked in front of the first building, which had a
small sign over the door reading front office. no one
else was parked there, so i was sure it was off limits,
but i decided i would get directions inside instead of
circling around in the rain like an idiot. i stepped
unwillingly out of the toasty truck cab and walked
down a little stone path lined with dark hedges. i took
a deep breath before opening the door.

inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than i'd hoped.
the office was small; a little waiting area with padded
folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet,
notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big clock
ticking loudly. plants grew everywhere in large plastic
pots, as if there wasn't enough greenery outside. the
room was cut in half by a long counter, cluttered with
wire baskets full of papers and brightly colored flyers
taped to its front. there were three desks behind the
counter, one of which was manned by a large, red-
haired woman wearing glasses. she was wearing a
purple t-shirt, which immediately made me feel
overdressed. the red-haired woman looked up. "can i
help you?"

"i'm isabella swan," i informed her, and saw the
immediate awareness light her eyes. i was expected, a
13 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
topic of gossip no doubt. daughter of the chief's
flighty ex-wife, come home at last.

"of course," she said. she dug through a precariously
stacked pile of documents on her desk till she found
the ones she was looking for. "i have your schedule
right here, and a map of the school." she brought
several sheets to the counter to show roe.

she went through my classes for me, highlighting the
best route to each on the map, and gave me a slip to
have each teacher sign, which i was to bring back at
the end of the day. she smiled at me and hoped, like
charlie, that i would like it here in forks. i smiled
back as convincingly as i could.

when i went back out to my truck, other students
were starting to arrive. i drove around the school,
following the line of traffic. i was glad to see that most
of the cars were older like mine, nothing flashy. at
home i'd lived in one of the few lower-income
neighborhoods that were included in the paradise
valley district. it was a common thing to see a new
mercedes or porsche in the student lot. the nicest car
here was a shiny volvo, and it stood out. still, i cut
the engine as soon as i was in a spot, so that the
thunderous volume wouldn't draw attention to me. i
looked at the map in the truck, trying to memorize it
now; hopefully i wouldn't have to walk around with it
stuck in front of my nose all day. i stuffed everything
in my bag, slung the strap over my shoulder, and
sucked in a huge breath. i can do this, i lied to myself
feebly. no one was going to bite me. i finally exhaled
and stepped out of the truck. i kept my face pulled
back into my hood as i walked to the sidewalk,
14 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
crowded with teenagers. my plain black jacket didn't
stand out, i noticed with relief.

once i got around the cafeteria, building three was
easy to spot. a large black "3" was painted on a white
square on the east corner. i felt my breathing
gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as i
approached the door. i tried holding my breath as i
followed two unisex raincoats through the door.

the classroom was small. the people in front of me
stopped just inside the door to hang up their coats on
a long row of hooks. i copied them. they were two
girls, one a porcelain-colored blonde, the other also
pale, with light brown hair. at least my skin wouldn't
be a standout here. i took the slip up to the teacher, a
tall, balding man whose desk had a nameplate
identifying him as mr. mason. he gawked at me when
he saw my name - not an encouraging response -
and of course i flushed tomato red. but at least he
sent me to an empty desk at the back without
introducing me to the class. it was harder for my new
classmates to stare at me in the back, but somehow,
they managed. i kept my eyes down on the reading
list the teacher had given me. it was fairly basic:
bronte, shakespeare, chaucer, faulkner. i'd already
read everything. that was comforting and boring. i
wondered if my mom would send me my folder of old
essays, or if she would think that was cheating. i
went through different arguments with her in my
head while the teacher droned on.

when the bell rang, a nasal buzzing sound, a gangly
boy with skin problems and hair black as an oil slick
leaned across the aisle to talk to me.
15 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you're isabella swan, aren't you?" he looked like the
overly helpful, chess club type.

"bella," i corrected. everyone within a three-seat
radius turned to look at me.

"where's your next class?" he asked.

i had to check in my bag. "um, government, with
jefferson, in building six."

there was nowhere to look without meeting curious
eyes.

"i'm headed toward building four, i could show you
the way" definitely over-helpful. "i'm eric," he
added.

i smiled tentatively. "thanks."

we got our jackets and headed out into the rain,
which had picked up. i could have sworn several
people behind us were walking close enough to
eavesdrop. i hoped i wasn't getting paranoid.

"so, this is a lot different than phoenix, huh?" he
asked.

"very."

"it doesn't rain much there, does it?"

"three or four times a year."

"wow, what must that be like?" he wondered.

"sunny," i told him.

"you don't look very tan."
16 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"my mother is part albino."

he studied my face apprehensively, and i sighed. it
looked like clouds and a sense of humor didn't mix. a
few months of this and i'd forget how to use sarcasm.

we walked back around the cafeteria, to the south
buildings by the gym. eric walked me right to the
door, though it was clearly marked.

"well, good luck," he said as i touched the handle.
"maybe we'll have some other classes together." he
sounded hopeful.

i smiled at him vaguely and went inside.

the rest of the morning passed in about the same
fashion. my trigonometry teacher, mr. varner, who i
would have hated anyway just because of the subject
he taught, was the only one who made me stand in
front of the class and introduce myself. i stammered,
blushed, and tripped over my own boots on the way
to my seat.

after two classes, i started to recognize several of the
faces in each class. there was always someone braver
than the others who would introduce themselves and
ask me questions about how i was liking forks. i tried
to be diplomatic, but mostly i just lied a lot. at least i
never needed the map.

one girl sat next to me in both trig and spanish, and
she walked with me to the cafeteria for lunch. she
was tiny, several inches shorter than my five feet four
inches, but her wildly curly dark hair made up a lot of
the difference between our heights. i couldn't

17 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
remember her name, so i smiled and nodded as she
prattled about teachers and classes. i didn't try to
keep up.

we sat at the end of a full table with several of her
friends, who she introduced to me. i forgot all their
names as soon as she spoke them. they seemed
impressed by her bravery in speaking to me. the boy
from english, eric, waved at me from across the
room.

it was there, sitting in the lunchroom, trying to make
conversation with seven curious strangers, that i first
saw them.

they were sitting in the corner of the cafeteria, as far
away from where i sat as possible in the long room.
there were five of them. they weren't talking, and
they weren't eating, though they each had a tray of
untouched food in front of them. they weren't
gawking at me, unlike most of the other students, so
it was safe to stare at them without fear of meeting an
excessively interested pair of eyes. but it was none of
these things that caught, and held, my attention.

they didn't look anything alike. of the three boys, one
was big - muscled like a serious weight lifter, with
dark, curly hair. another was taller, leaner, but still
muscular, and honey blond. the last was lanky, less
bulky, with untidy, bronze-colored hair. he was more
boyish than the others, who looked like they could be
in college, or even teachers here rather than students.

the girls were opposites. the tall one was statuesque.
she had a beautiful figure, the kind you saw on the
cover of the sports illustrated swimsuit issue, the
18 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her
self-esteem just by being in the same room. her hair
was golden, gently waving to the middle of her back.
the short girl was pixielike, thin in the extreme, with
small features. her hair was a deep black, cropped
short and pointing in every direction.

and yet, they were all exactly alike. every one of them
was chalky pale, the palest of all the students living
in this sunless town. paler than me, the albino. they
all had very dark eyes despite the range in hair tones.
they also had dark shadows under those eyes -
purplish, bruiselike shadows. as if they were all
suffering from a sleepless night, or almost done
recovering from a broken nose. though their noses,
all their features, were straight, perfect, angular.

but all this is not why i couldn't look away.

i stared because their faces, so different, so similar,
were all devastatingly, inhumanly beautiful. they
were faces you never expected to see except perhaps
on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. or
painted by an old master as the face of an angel. it
was hard to decide who was the most beautiful -
maybe the perfect blond girl, or the bronze-haired
boy.

they were all looking away - away from each other,
away from the other students, away from anything in
particular as far as i could tell. as i watched, the
small girl rose with her tray - unopened soda,
unbitten apple - and walked away with a quick,
graceful lope that belonged on a runway. i watched,
amazed at her lithe dancer's step, till she dumped her

19 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
tray and glided through the back door, faster than i
would have thought possible. my eyes darted back to
the others, who sat unchanging.

"who are they?" i asked the girl from my spanish
class, whose name i'd forgotten.

as she looked up to see who i meant - though
already knowing, probably, from my tone - suddenly
he looked at her, the thinner one, the boyish one, the
youngest, perhaps. he looked at my neighbor for just
a fraction of a second, and then his dark eyes
flickered to mine.

he looked away quickly, more quickly than i could,
though in a flush of embarrassment i dropped my
eyes at once. in that brief flash of a glance, his face
held nothing of interest - it was as if she had called
his name, and he'd looked up in involuntary
response, already having decided not to answer.

my neighbor giggled in embarrassment, looking at the
table like i did.

"that's edward and emmett cullen, and rosalie and
jasper hale. the one who left was alice cullen; they
all live together with dr. cullen and his wife." she
said this under her breath.

i glanced sideways at the beautiful boy, who was
looking at his tray now, picking a bagel to pieces with
long, pale fingers. his mouth was moving very
quickly, his perfect lips barely opening. the other
three still looked away, and yet i felt he was speaking
quietly to them. strange, unpopular names, i
thought. the kinds of names grandparents had. but
20 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
maybe that was in vogue here - small town names? i
finally remembered that my neighbor was called
jessica, a perfectly common name. there were two
girls named jessica in my history class back home.

"they are very nice-looking." i struggled with the
conspicuous understatement.

"yes!" jessica agreed with another giggle. "they're all
together though - emmett and rosalie, and jasper
and alice, i mean. and they live together." her voice
held all the shock and condemnation of the small
town, i thought critically. but, if i was being honest, i
had to admit that even in phoenix, it would cause
gossip.

"which ones are the cullens?" i asked. "they don't
look related"

"oh, they're not. dr. cullen is really young, in his
twenties or early thirties. they're all adopted. the
hales are brother and sister, twins - the blondes -
and they're foster children."

"they look a little old for foster children."

"they are now, jasper and rosalie are both eighteen,
but they've been with mrs. cullen since they were
eight. she's their aunt or something like that."

"that's really kind of nice - for them to take care of
all those kids like that, when they're so young and
everything."

"i guess so," jessica admitted reluctantly, and i got
the impression that she didn't like the doctor and his
wife for some reason. with the glances she was
21 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
throwing at their adopted children, i would presume
the reason was jealousy. "i think that mrs. cullen
can't have any kids, though," she added, as if that
lessened their kindness.

throughout all this conversation, my eyes flickered
again and again to the table where the strange family
sat. they continued to look at the walls and not eat.

"have they always lived in forks?" i asked. surely i
would have noticed them on one of my summers here.

"no," she said in a voice that implied it should be
obvious, even to a new arrival like me. "they just
moved down two years ago from somewhere in
alaska."

i felt a surge of pity, and relief. pity because, as
beautiful as they were, they were outsiders, clearly
not accepted. relief that i wasn't the only newcomer
here, and certainly not the most interesting by any
standard.

as i examined them, the youngest, one of the cullens,
looked up and met my gaze, this time with evident
curiosity in his expression. as i looked swiftly away, it
seemed to me that his glance held some kind of
unmet expectation.

"which one is the boy with the reddish brown hair?" i
asked. i peeked at him from the corner of my eye, and
he was still staring at me, but not gawking like the
other students had today - he had a slightly
frustrated expression. i looked down again.

22 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"that's edward. he's gorgeous, of course, but don't
waste your time. he doesn't date. apparently none of
the girls here are good-looking enough for him." she
sniffed, a clear case of sour grapes. i wondered when
he'd turned her down.

i bit my lip to hide my smile. then i glanced at him
again. his face was turned away, but i thought his
cheek appeared lifted, as if he were smiling, too.

after a few more minutes, the four of them left the
table together. they all were noticeably graceful -
even the big, brawny one. it was unsettling to watch.
the one named edward didn't look at me again. i sat
at the table with jessica and her friends longer than i
would have if i'd been sitting alone. i was anxious not
to be late for class on my first day. one of my new
acquaintances, who considerately reminded me that
her name was angela, had biology ii with me the next
hour. we walked to class together in silence. she was
shy, too.

when we entered the classroom, angela went to sit at
a black-topped lab table exactly like the ones i was
used to. she already had a neighbor. in fact, all the
tables were filled but one. next to the center aisle, i
recognized edward cullen by his unusual hair, sitting
next to that single open seat.

as i walked down the aisle to introduce myself to the
teacher and get my slip signed, i was watching him
surreptitiously. just as i passed, he suddenly went
rigid in his seat. he stared at me again, meeting my
eyes with the strangest expression on his face - it
was hostile, furious. i looked away quickly, shocked,

23 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
going red again. i stumbled over a book in the
walkway and had to catch myself on the edge of a
table. the girl sitting there giggled.

i'd noticed that his eyes were black - coal black.

mr. banner signed my slip and handed me a book
with no nonsense about introductions. i could tell we
were going to get along. of course, he had no choice
but to send me to the one open seat in the middle of
the room. i kept my eyes down as i went to sit by him,
bewildered by the antagonistic stare he'd given me.

i didn't look up as i set my book on the table and took
my seat, but i saw his posture change from the corner
of my eye. he was leaning away from me, sitting on
the extreme edge of his chair and averting his face
like he smelled something bad. inconspicuously, i
sniffed my hair. it smelled like strawberries, the scent
of my favorite shampoo. it seemed an innocent
enough odor. i let my hair fall over my right shoulder,
making a dark curtain between us, and tried to pay
attention to the teacher. unfortunately the lecture
was on cellular anatomy, something i'd already
studied. i took notes carefully anyway, always looking
down. i couldn't stop myself from peeking
occasionally through the screen of my hair at the
strange boy next to me. during the whole class, he
never relaxed his stiff position on the edge of his
chair, sitting as far from me as possible. i could see
his hand on his left leg was clenched into a fist,
tendons standing out under his pale skin. this, too,
he never relaxed. he had the long sleeves of his white
shirt pushed up to his elbows, and his forearm was
surprisingly hard and muscular beneath his light
24 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
skin. he wasn't nearly as slight as he'd looked next to
his burly brother.

the class seemed to drag on longer than the others.
was it because the day was finally coming to a close,
or because i was waiting for his tight fist to loosen? it
never did; he continued to sit so still it looked like he
wasn't breathing. what was wrong with him? was
this his normal behavior? i questioned my judgment
on jessica's bitterness at lunch today. maybe she was
not as resentful as i'd thought.

it couldn't have anything to do with me. he didn't
know me from eve. i peeked up at him one more time,
and regretted it. he was glaring down at me again, his
black eyes full of revulsion. as i flinched away from
him, shrinking against my chair, the phrase if looks
could kill suddenly ran through my mind.

at that moment, the bell rang loudly, making me
jump, and edward cullen was out of his seat. fluidly
he rose - he was much taller than i'd thought - his
back to me, and he was out the door before anyone
else was out of their seat.

i sat frozen in my seat, staring blankly after him. he
was so mean. it wasn't fair. i began gathering up my
things slowly, trying to block the anger that filled me,
for fear my eyes would tear up. for some reason, my
temper was hardwired to my tear ducts. i usually
cried when i was angry, a humiliating tendency.

"aren't you isabella swan?" a male voice asked. i
looked up to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale
blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling

25 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
at me in a friendly way. he obviously didn't think i
smelled bad.

"bella," i corrected him, with a smile.

"i'm mike."

"hi, mike."

"do you need any help finding your next class?"

"i'm headed to the gym, actually. i think i can find it."

"that's my next class, too." he seemed thrilled,
though it wasn't that big of a coincidence in a school
this small.

we walked to class together; he was a chatterer - he
supplied most of the conversation, which made it easy
for me. he'd lived in california till he was ten, so he
knew how i felt about the sun. it turned out he was in
my english class also. he was the nicest person i'd
met today. but as we were entering the gym, he
asked, "so, did you stab edward cullen with a pencil
or what? i've never seen him act like that." i cringed.
so i wasn't the only one who had noticed. and,
apparently, that wasn't edward cullen's usual
behavior. i decided to play dumb.

"was that the boy i sat next to in biology?" i asked
artlessly.

"yes," he said. "he looked like he was in pain or
something."

"i don't know," i responded. "i never spoke to him."

26 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"he's a weird guy." mike lingered by me instead of
heading to the dressing room. "if i were lucky enough
to sit by you, i would have talked to you."

i smiled at him before walking through the girls'
locker room door. he was friendly and clearly
admiring. but it wasn't enough to ease my irritation.

the gym teacher, coach clapp, found me a uniform
but didn't make me dress down for today's class. at
home, only two years of re. were required. here, p.e.
was mandatory all four years. forks was literally my
personal hell on earth.

i watched four volleyball games running
simultaneously. remembering how many injuries i
had sustained - and inflicted - playing volleyball, i
felt faintly nauseated.

the final bell rang at last. i walked slowly to the office
to return my paperwork. the rain had drifted away,
but the wind was strong, and colder. i wrapped my
arms around myself.

when i walked into the warm office, i almost turned
around and walked back out.

edward cullen stood at the desk in front of me. i
recognized again that tousled bronze hair. he didn't
appear to notice the sound of my entrance. i stood
pressed against the back wall, waiting for the
receptionist to be free.

he was arguing with her in a low, attractive voice. i
quickly picked up the gist of the argument. he was

27 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
trying to trade from sixth-hour biology to another
time - any other time.

i just couldn't believe that this was about me. it had
to be something else, something that happened before
i entered the biology room. the look on his face must
have been about another aggravation entirely. it was
impossible that this stranger could take such a
sudden, intense dislike to me.

the door opened again, and the cold wind suddenly
gusted through the room, rustling the papers on the
desk, swirling my hair around my face. the girl who
came in merely stepped to the desk, placed a note in
the wire basket, and walked out again. but edward
cullen's back stiffened, and he turned slowly to glare
at me - his face was absurdly handsome - with
piercing, hate-filled eyes. for an instant, i felt a thrill
of genuine fear, raising the hair on my arms. the look
only lasted a second, but it chilled me more than the
freezing wind. he turned back to the receptionist.

"never mind, then," he said hastily in a voice like
velvet. "i can see that it's impossible. thank you so
much for your help." and he turned on his heel
without another look at me, and disappeared out the
door. i went meekly to the desk, my face white for
once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip.

"how did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist
asked maternally.

"fine," i lied, my voice weak. she didn't look
convinced. when i got to the truck, it was almost the
last car in the lot. it seemed like a haven, already the
closest thing to home i had in this damp green hole. i
28 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
sat inside for a while, just staring out the windshield
blankly. but soon i was cold enough to need the
heater, so i turned the key and the engine roared to
life. i headed back to charlie's house, fighting tears
the whole way there.

29 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 open book

the next day was better and worse.

it was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the
clouds were dense and opaque. it was easier because
i knew what to expect of my day. mike came to sit by
me in english, and walked me to my next class, with
chess club eric glaring at him all the while; that was
nattering. people didn't look at me quite as much as
they had yesterday. i sat with a big group at lunch
that included mike, eric, jessica, and several other
people whose names and faces i now remembered. i
began to feel like i was treading water, instead of
drowning in it.

it was worse because i was tired; i still couldn't sleep
with the wind echoing around the house. it was worse
because mr. varner called on me in trig when my
hand wasn't raised and i had the wrong answer. it
was miserable because i had to play volleyball, and
the one time i didn't cringe out of the way of the ball,
i hit my teammate in the head with it. and it was
worse because edward cullen wasn't in school at all.
all morning i was dreading lunch, fearing his bizarre
glares. part of me wanted to confront him and
demand to know what his problem was. while i was
lying sleepless in my bed, i even imagined what i
would say. but i knew myself too well to think i would
really have the guts to do it. i made the cowardly lion
look like the terminator.

30 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
but when i walked into the cafeteria with jessica -
trying to keep my eyes from sweeping the place for
him, and failing entirely - i saw that his four siblings
of sorts were sitting together at the same table, and
he was not with them.

mike intercepted us and steered us to his table.
jessica seemed elated by the attention, and her
friends quickly joined us. but as i tried to listen to
their easy chatter, i was terribly uncomfortable,
waiting nervously for the moment he would arrive. i
hoped that he would simply ignore me when he came,
and prove my suspicions false.

he didn't come, and as time passed i grew more and
more tense. i walked to biology with more confidence
when, by the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed.
mike, who was taking on the qualities of a golden
retriever, walked faithfully by my side to class. i held
my breath at the door, but edward cullen wasn't
there, either. i exhaled and went to my seat. mike
followed, talking about an upcoming trip to the beach.
he lingered by my desk till the bell rang. then he
smiled at me wistfully and went to sit by a girl with
braces and a bad perm. it looked like i was going to
have to do something about mike, and it wouldn't be
easy. in a town like this, where everyone lived on top
of everyone else, diplomacy was essential. i had never
been enormously tactful; i had no practice dealing
with overly friendly boys.

i was relieved that i had the desk to myself, that
edward was absent. i told myself that repeatedly. but
i couldn't get rid of the nagging suspicion that i was
the reason he wasn't there. it was ridiculous, and
31 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
egotistical, to think that i could affect anyone that
strongly. it was impossible. and yet i couldn't stop
worrying that it was true. when the school day was
finally done, and the blush was fading out of my
cheeks from the volleyball incident, i changed quickly
back into my jeans and navy blue sweater. i hurried
from the girls' locker room, pleased to find that i had
successfully evaded my retriever friend for the
moment. i walked swiftly out to the parking lot. it was
crowded now with fleeing students. i got in my truck
and dug through my bag to make sure i had what i
needed.

last night i'd discovered that charlie couldn't cook
much besides fried eggs and bacon. so i requested
that i be assigned kitchen detail for the duration of
my stay. he was willing enough to hand over the keys
to the banquet hall. i also found out that he had no
food in the house. so i had my shopping list and the
cash from the jar in the cupboard labeled food

money, and i was on my way to the thriftway.

i gunned my deafening engine to life, ignoring the
heads that turned in my direction, and backed
carefully into a place in the line of cars that were
waiting to exit the parking lot. as i waited, trying to
pretend that the earsplitting rumble was coming from
someone else's car, i saw the two cullens and the
hale twins getting into their car. it was the shiny new
volvo. of course. i hadn't noticed their clothes before
- i'd been too mesmerized by their faces. now that i
looked, it was obvious that they were all dressed
exceptionally well; simply, but in clothes that subtly
hinted at designer origins. with their remarkable good
32 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
looks, the style with which they carried themselves,
they could have worn dishrags and pulled it off. it
seemed excessive for them to have both looks and
money. but as far as i could tell, life worked that way
most of the time. it didn't look as if it bought them
any acceptance here.

no, i didn't fully believe that. the isolation must be
their desire; i couldn't imagine any door that wouldn't
be opened by that degree of beauty.

they looked at my noisy truck as i passed them, just
like everyone else. i kept my eyes straight forward and
was relieved when i finally was free of the school
grounds.

the thriftway was not far from the school, just a few
streets south, off the highway. it was nice to be inside
the supermarket; it felt normal. i did the shopping at
home, and i fell into the pattern of the familiar task
gladly. the store was big enough inside that i couldn't
hear the tapping of the rain on the roof to remind me
where i was. when i got home, i unloaded all the
groceries, stuffing them in wherever i could find an
open space. i hoped charlie wouldn't mind. i wrapped
potatoes in foil and stuck them in the oven to bake,
covered a steak in marinade and balanced it on top of
a carton of eggs in the fridge. when i was finished
with that, i took my book bag upstairs. before
starting my homework, i changed into a pair of dry
sweats, pulled my damp hair up into a pony-tail, and
checked my e-mail for the first time. i had three
messages.

"bella," my mom wrote

33 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
write me as soon as you get in. tell me how your
flight was. is it raining? i miss you already. i'm almost
finished packing for florida, but i can't find my pink
blouse. do you know where i put it? phil says hi.
mom.

i sighed and went to the next. it was sent eight hours
after the first.

"bella," she wrote

why haven't you e-mailed me yet? what are you
waiting for? mom. the last was from this morning.

isabella,

if i haven't heard from you by 5:30 p.m. today i'm
calling charlie. i checked the clock. i still had an
hour, but my mom was well known for jumping the
gun.

mom,

calm down. i'm writing right now. don't do anything
rash. bella.

i sent that, and began again.

mom,

everything is great. of course it's raining. i was
waiting for something to write about. school isn't bad,
just a little repetitive. i met some nice kids who sit by
me at lunch.

your blouse is at the dry cleaners - you were
supposed to pick it up friday.

34 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
charlie bought me a truck, can you believe it? i love
it. it's old, but really sturdy, which is good, you know,
for me.

i miss you, too. i'll write again soon, but i'm not going
to check my e-mail every five minutes. relax, breathe.
i love you.

bella.

i had decided to read wuthering heights - the novel
we were currently studying in english - yet again for
the fun of it, and that's what i was doing when
charlie came home. i'd lost track of the time, and i
hurried downstairs to take the potatoes out and put
the steak in to broil.

"bella?" my father called out when he heard me on
the stairs. who else? i thought to myself.

"hey, dad, welcome home."

"thanks." he hung up his gun belt and stepped out of
his boots as i bustled about the kitchen. as far as i
was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. but he
kept it ready. when i came here as a child, he would
always remove the bullets as soon as he walked in the
door. i guess he considered me old enough now not to
shoot myself by accident, and not depressed enough
to shoot myself on purpose.

"what's for dinner?" he asked warily. my mother was
an imaginative cook, and her experiments weren't
always edible. i was surprised, and sad, that he
seemed to remember that far back.

35 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"steak and potatoes," i answered, and he looked
relieved. he seemed to feel awkward standing in the
kitchen doing nothing; he lumbered into the living
room to watch tv while i worked. we were both more
comfortable that way. i made a salad while the steaks
cooked, and set the table.

i called him in when dinner was ready, and he sniffed
appreciatively as he walked into the room.

"smells good, bell."

"thanks."

we ate in silence for a few minutes. it wasn't
uncomfortable. neither of us was bothered by the
quiet. in some ways, we were well suited for living
together.

"so, how did you like school? have you made any
friends?" he asked as he was taking seconds.

"well, i have a few classes with a girl named jessica. i
sit with her friends at lunch. and there's this boy,
mike, who's very friendly. everybody seems pretty
nice." with one outstanding exception.

"that must be mike newton. nice kid - nice family.
his dad owns the sporting goods store just outside of
town. he makes a good living off all the backpackers
who come through here."

"do you know the cullen family?" i asked hesitantly.

"dr. cullen's family? sure. dr. cullen's a great man."

36 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"they the kids are a little different. they don't
seem to fit in very well at school."

charlie surprised me by looking angry.

"people in this town," he muttered. "dr. cullen is a
brilliant surgeon who could probably work in any
hospital in the world, make ten times the salary he
gets here," he continued, getting louder. "we're lucky
to have him - lucky that his wife wanted to live in a
small town. he's an asset to the community, and all
of those kids are well behaved and polite. i had my
doubts, when they first moved in, with all those
adopted teenagers. i thought we might have some
problems with them. but they're all very mature - i
haven't had one speck of trouble from any of them.
that's more than i can say for the children of some
folks who have lived in this town for generations. and
they stick together the way a family should -
camping trips every other weekend just because
they're newcomers, people have to talk."

it was the longest speech i'd ever heard charlie make.
he must feel strongly about whatever people were
saying.

i backpedaled. "they seemed nice enough to me. i
just noticed they kept to themselves. they're all very
attractive," i added, trying to be more complimentary.

"you should see the doctor," charlie said, laughing.
"it's a good thing he's happily married. a lot of the
nurses at the hospital have a hard time concentrating
on their work with him around."

37 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
we lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. he
cleared the table while i started on the dishes. he
went back to the tv, and after i finished washing the
dishes by hand - no dishwasher - i went upstairs
unwillingly to work on my math homework. i could
feel a tradition in the making.

that night it was finally quiet. i fell asleep quickly,
exhausted. the rest of the week was uneventful. i got
used to the routine of my classes. by friday i was
able to recognize, if not name, almost all the students
at school. in gym, the kids on my team learned not to
pass me the ball and to step quickly in front of me if
the other team tried to take advantage of my
weakness. i happily stayed out of their way. edward
cullen didn't come back to school.

every day, i watched anxiously until the rest of the
cullens entered the cafeteria without him. then i
could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation.
mostly it centered around a trip to the la push ocean
park in two weeks that mike was putting together. i
was invited, and i had agreed to go, more out of
politeness than desire. beaches should be hot and
dry.

by friday i was perfectly comfortable entering my
biology class, no longer worried that edward would
be there. for all i knew, he had dropped out of school.
i tried not to think about him, but i couldn't totally
suppress the worry that i was responsible for his
continued absence, ridiculous as it seemed.

my first weekend in forks passed without incident.
charlie, unused to spending time in the usually

38 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
empty house, worked most of the weekend. i cleaned
the house, got ahead on my homework, and wrote my
mom more bogusly cheerful e-mail. i did drive to the
library saturday, but it was so poorly stocked that i
didn't bother to get a card; i would have to make a
date to visit olympia or seattle soon and find a good
bookstore. i wondered idly what kind of gas mileage
the truck got and shuddered at the thought.

the rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so i was
able to sleep well. people greeted me in the parking lot
monday morning. i didn't know all their names, but i
waved back and smiled at everyone. it was colder this
morning, but happily not raining. in english, mike
took his accustomed seat by my side. we had a pop
quiz on wuthering heights. it was straightforward,
very easy.

all in all, i was feeling a lot more comfortable than i
had thought i would feel by this point. more
comfortable than i had ever expected to feel here.

when we walked out of class, the air was full of
swirling bits of white. i could hear people shouting
excitedly to each other. the wind bit at my cheeks,
my nose.

"wow," mike said. "it's snowing."

i looked at the little cotton fluffs that were building up
along the sidewalk and swirling erratically past my
face.

"ew." snow. there went my good day.

he looked surprised. "don't you like snow?"

39 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no. that means it's too cold for rain." obviously.
"besides, i thought it was supposed to come down in
flakes - you know, each one unique and all that.
these just look like the ends of q-tips."

"haven't you ever seen snow fall before?" he asked
incredulously.

"sure i have." i paused. "on tv."

mike laughed. and then a big, squishy ball of
dripping snow smacked into the back of his head. we
both turned to see where it came from. i had my
suspicions about eric, who was walking away, his
back toward us - in the wrong direction for his next
class. mike appatently had the same notion. he bent
over and began scraping together a pile of the white
mush.

"i'll see you at lunch, okay?" i kept walking as i
spoke. "once people start throwing wet stuff, i go
inside."

he just nodded, his eyes on eric's retreating figure.

throughout the morning, everyone chattered excitedly
about the snow; apparently it was the first snowfall of
the new year. i kept my mouth shut. sure, it was
drier than rain - until it melted in your socks. i
walked alertly to the cafeteria with jessica after
spanish. mush balls were flying everywhere. i kept a
binder in my hands, ready to use it as a shield if
necessary. jessica thought i was hilarious, but
something in my expression kept her from lobbing a
snowball at me herself. mike caught up to us as we
walked in the doors, laughing, with ice melting the
40 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
spikes in his hair. he and jessica were talking
animatedly about the snow fight as we got in line to
buy food. i glanced toward that table in the corner out
of habit. and then i froze where i stood. there were
five people at the table.

jessica pulled on my arm.

"hello? bella? what do you want?"

i looked down; my ears were hot. i had no reason to
feel self-conscious, i reminded myself. i hadn't done
anything wrong.

"what's with bella?" mike asked jessica.

"nothing," i answered. "i'll just get a soda today." i
caught up to the end of the line.

"aren't you hungry?" jessica asked.

"actually, i feel a little sick," i said, my eyes still on
the floor. i waited for them to get their food, and then
followed them to a table, my eyes on my feet.

i sipped my soda slowly, my stomach churning. twice
mike asked, with unnecessary concern, how i was
feeling.

i told him it was nothing, but i was wondering if i
should play it up and escape to the nurse's office for
the next hour.

ridiculous. i shouldn't have to run away.

i decided to permit myself one glance at the cullen
family's table. if he was glaring at me, i would skip
biology, like the coward i was. i kept my head down
41 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and glanced up under my lashes. none of them were
looking this way. i lifted my head a little.

they were laughing. edward, jasper, and emmett all
had their hair entirely saturated with melting snow.
alice and rosalie were leaning away as emmett shook
his dripping hair toward them. they were enjoying the
snowy day, just like everyone else - only they looked
more like a scene from a movie than the rest of us.

but, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there
was something different, and i couldn't quite pinpoint
what that difference was. i examined edward the
most carefully. his skin was less pale, i decided -
flushed from the snow fight maybe - the circles
under his eyes much less noticeable. but there was
something more. i pondered, staring, trying to isolate
the change.

"bella, what are you staring at?" jessica intruded, her
eyes following my stare.

at that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet
mine. i dropped my head, letting my hair fall to
conceal my face. i was sure, though, in the instant
our eyes met, that he didn't look harsh or unfriendly
as he had the last time i'd seen him. he looked merely
curious again, unsatisfied in some way.

"edward cullen is staring at you," jessica giggled in
my ear.

"he doesn't look angry, does he?" i couldn't help
asking.

42 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no," she said, sounding confused by my question.
"should he be?"

"i don't think he likes me," i confided. i still felt
queasy. i put my head down on my arm.

"the cullens don't like anybody well, they don't
notice anybody enough to like them. but he's still
staring at you."

"stop looking at him," i hissed.

she snickered, but she looked away. i raised my head
enough to make sure that she did, contemplating
violence if she resisted.

mike interrupted us then - he was planning an epic
battle of the blizzard in the parking lot after school
and wanted us to join. jessica agreed
enthusiastically. the way she looked at mike left little
doubt that she would be up for anything he
suggested. i kept silent. i would have to hide in the
gym until the parking lot cleared.

for the rest of the lunch hour i very carefully kept my
eyes at my own table. i decided to honor the bargain
i'd made with myself. since he didn't look angry, i
would go to biology. my stomach did frightened little
flips at the thought of sitting next to him again. i
didn't really want to walk to class with mike as usual
- he seemed to be a popular target for the snowball
snipers - but when we went to the door, everyone
besides me groaned in unison. it was raining,
washing all traces of the snow away in clear, icy
ribbons down the side of the walkway. i pulled my

43 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
hood up, secretly pleased. i would be free to go
straight home after gym.

mike kept up a string of complaints on the way to
building four. once inside the classroom, i saw with
relief that my table was still empty. mr. banner was
walking around the room, distributing one
microscope and box of slides to each table. class
didn't start for a few minutes, and the room buzzed
with conversation. i kept my eyes away from the door,
doodling idly on the cover of my notebook.

i heard very clearly when the chair next to me moved,
but my eyes stayed carefully focused on the pattern i
was drawing.

"hello," said a quiet, musical voice.

i looked up, stunned that he was speaking to me. he
was sitting as far away from me as the desk allowed,
but his chair was angled toward me. his hair was
dripping wet, disheveled - even so, he looked like
he'd just finished shooting a commercial for hair gel.
his dazzling face was friendly, open, a slight smile on
his flawless lips. but his eyes were careful.

"my name is edward cullen," he continued. "i didn't
have a chance to introduce myself last week. you
must be bella swan." my mind was spinning with
confusion. had i made up the whole thing? he was
perfectly polite now. i had to speak; he was waiting.
but i couldn't think of anything conventional to say.

"h-how do you know my name?" i stammered.

he laughed a soft, enchanting laugh.

44 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh, i think everyone knows your name. the whole
town's been waiting for you to arrive."

i grimaced. i knew it was something like that.

"no," i persisted stupidly. "i meant, why did you call
me bella?" he seemed confused. "do you prefer
isabella?"

"no, i like bella," i said. "but i think charlie - i mean
my dad - must call me isabella behind my back -
that's what everyone here seems to know me as," i
tried to explain, feeling like an utter moron.

"oh." he let it drop. i looked away awkwardly.

thankfully, mr. banner started class at that moment.
i tried to concentrate as he explained the lab we
would be doing today. the slides in the box were out
of order. working as lab partners, we had to separate
the slides of onion root tip cells into the phases of
mitosis they represented and label them accordingly.
we weren't supposed to use our books. in twenty
minutes, he would be coming around to see who had
it right.

"get started," he commanded.

"ladies first, partner?" edward asked. i looked up to
see him smiling a crooked smile so beautiful that i
could only stare at him like an idiot.

"or i could start, if you wish." the smile faded; he was
obviously wondering if i was mentally competent.

"no," i said, flushing. "i'll go ahead." i was showing
off, just a little. i'd already done this lab, and i knew
45 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
what i was looking for. it should be easy. i snapped
the first slide into place under the microscope and
adjusted it quickly to the 40x objective. i studied the
slide briefly.

my assessment was confident. "prophase."

"do you mind if i look?" he asked as i began to
remove the slide. his hand caught mine, to stop me,
as he asked. his fingers were ice-cold, like he'd been
holding them in a snowdrift before class. but that
wasn't why i jerked my hand away so quickly. when
he touched me, it stung my hand as if an electric
current had passed through us.

"i'm sorry," he muttered, pulling his hand back
immediately. however, he continued to reach for the
microscope. i watched him, still staggered, as he
examined the slide for an even shorter time than i
had.

"prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first
space on our worksheet. he swiftly switched out the
first slide for the second, and then glanced at it
cursorily.

"anaphase," he murmured, writing it down as he
spoke. i kept my voice indifferent. "may i?"

he smirked and pushed the microscope to me.

i looked through the eyepiece eagerly, only to be
disappointed. dang it, he was right.

"slide three?" i held out my hand without looking at
him. he handed it to me; it seemed like he was being
careful not to touch my skin again.
46 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i took the most fleeting look i could manage.

"interphase." i passed him the microscope before he
could ask for it. he took a swift peek, and then wrote
it down. i would have written it while he looked, but
his clear, elegant script intimidated me. i didn't want
to spoil the page with my clumsy scrawl.

we were finished before anyone else was close. i could
see mike and his partner comparing two slides again
and again, and another group had their book open
under the table.

which left me with nothing to do but try to not look at
him

unsuccessfully. i glanced up, and he was staring at
me, that same inexplicable look of frustration in his
eyes. suddenly i identified that subtle difference in
his face.

"did you get contacts?" i blurted out unthinkingly. he
seemed puzzled by my unexpected question. "no."

"oh," i mumbled. "i thought there was something
different about your eyes."

he shrugged, and looked away.

in fact, i was sure there was something different. i
vividly remembered the flat black color of his eyes the
last time he'd glared at me - the color was striking
against the background of his pale skin and his
auburn hair. today, his eyes were a completely
different color: a strange ocher, darker than
butterscotch, but with the same golden tone. i didn't
understand how that could be, unless he was lying
47 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
for some reason about the contacts. or maybe forks
was making me crazy in the literal sense of the word.

i looked down. his hands were clenched into hard
fists again. mr. banner came to our table then, to see
why we weren't working. he looked over our
shoulders to glance at the completed lab, and then
stared more intently to check the answers.

"so, edward, didn't you think isabella should get a
chance with the microscope?" mr. banner asked.

"bella," edward corrected automatically. "actually,
she identified three of the five."

mr. banner looked at me now; his expression was
skeptical.

"have you done this lab before?" he asked.

i smiled sheepishly. "not with onion root."

"whitefish blastula?"

"yeah."

mr. banner nodded. "were you in an advanced
placement program in phoenix?"

"yes."

"well," he said after a moment, "i guess it's good you
two are lab partners." he mumbled something else as
he walked away. after he left, i began doodling on my
notebook again.

"it's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" edward asked. i
had the feeling that he was forcing himself to make

48 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
small talk with me. paranoia swept over me again. it
was like he had heard my conversation with jessica
at lunch and was trying to prove me wrong.

"not really," i answered honestly, instead of
pretending to be normal like everyone else. i was still
trying to dislodge the stupid feeling of suspicion, and
i couldn't concentrate.

"you don't like the cold." it wasn't a question.

"or the wet."

"forks must be a difficult place for you to live," he
mused.

"you have no idea," i muttered darkly.

he looked fascinated by what i said, for some reason i
couldn't imagine. his face was such a distraction that
i tried not to look at it any more than courtesy
absolutely demanded.

"why did you come here, then?"

no one had asked me that - not straight out like he
did, demanding.

"it's complicated."

"i think i can keep up," he pressed.

i paused for a long moment, and then made the
mistake of meeting his gaze. his dark gold eyes
confused me, and i answered without thinking.

"my mother got remarried," i said.

49 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"that doesn't sound so complex," he disagreed, but he
was suddenly sympathetic. "when did that happen?"

"last september." my voice sounded sad, even to me.

"and you don't like him," edward surmised, his tone
still kind.

"no, phil is fine. too young, maybe, but nice enough."

"why didn't you stay with them?"

i couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to
stare at me with penetrating eyes, as if my dull life's
story was somehow vitally important.

"phil travels a lot. he plays ball for a living." i half-
smiled.

"have i heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response.

"probably not. he doesn't play well. strictly minor
league. he moves around a lot."

"and your mother sent you here so that she could
travel with him." he said it as an assumption again,
not a question.

my chin raised a fraction. "no, she did not send me
here. i sent myself." his eyebrows knit together. "i
don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed
unnecessarily frustrated by that fact.

i sighed. why was i explaining this to him? he
continued to stare at me with obvious curiosity.

"she stayed with me at first, but she missed him. it
made her unhappy so i decided it was time to spend

50 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
some quality time with charlie." my voice was glum
by the time i finished.

"but now you're unhappy," he pointed out.

"and?" i challenged.

"that doesn't seem fair." he shrugged, but his eyes
were still intense. i laughed without humor. "hasn't
anyone ever told you? life isn't fair."

"i believe i have heard that somewhere before," he
agreed dryly.

"so that's all," i insisted, wondering why he was still
staring at me that way.

his gaze became appraising. "you put on a good
show," he said slowly.

"but i'd be willing to bet that you're suffering more
than you let anyone see."

i grimaced at him, resisting the impulse to stick out
my tongue like a five-year-old, and looked away.

"am i wrong?"

i tried to ignore him.

"i didn't think so," he murmured smugly.

"why does it matter to you?" i asked, irritated. i kept
my eyes away, watching the teacher make his rounds.

"that's a very good question," he muttered, so quietly
that i wondered if he was talking to himself. however,
after a few seconds of silence, i decided that was the
only answer i was going to get.
51 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i sighed, scowling at the blackboard.

"am i annoying you?" he asked. he sounded amused.
i glanced at him without thinking and told the truth
again. "not exactly. i'm more annoyed at myself. my
face is so easy to read - my mother always calls me
her open book." i frowned.

"on the contrary, i find you very difficult to read."
despite everything that i'd said and he'd guessed, he
sounded like he meant it.

"you must be a good reader then," i replied.

"usually." he smiled widely, flashing a set of perfect,
ultrawhite teeth. mr. banner called the class to order
then, and i turned with relief to listen. i was in
disbelief that i'd just explained my dreary life to this
bizarre, beautiful boy who may or may not despise
me. he'd seemed engrossed in our conversation, but
now i could see, from the corner of my eye, that he
was leaning away from me again, his hands gripping
the edge of the table with unmistakable tension.

i tried to appear attentive as mr. banner illustrated,
with transparencies on the overhead projector, what i
had seen without difficulty through the microscope.
but my thoughts were unmanageable. when the bell
finally rang, edward rushed as swiftly and as
gracefully from the room as he had last monday. and,
like last monday, i stared after him in amazement.

mike skipped quickly to my side and picked up my
books for me. i imagined him with a wagging tail.

52 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"that was awful," he groaned. "they all looked exactly
the same. you're lucky you had cullen for a partner."

"i didn't have any trouble with it," i said, stung by his
assumption. i regretted the snub instantly. "i've done
the lab before, though," i added before he could get
his feelings hurt.

"cullen seemed friendly enough today," he
commented as we shrugged into our raincoats. he
didn't seem pleased about it.

i tried to sound indifferent. "i wonder what was with
him last monday." i couldn't concentrate on mike's
chatter as we walked to gym, and re. didn't do much
to hold my attention, either. mike was on my team
today. he chivalrously covered my position as well as
his own, so my woolgathering was only interrupted
when it was my turn to serve; my team ducked warily
out of the way every time i was up.

the rain was just a mist as i walked to the parking
lot, but i was happier when i was in the dry cab. i got
the heater running, for once not caring about the
mind-numbing roar of the engine. i unzipped my
jacket, put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair
out so the heater could dry it on the way home.

i looked around me to make sure it was clear. that's
when i noticed the still, white figure. edward cullen
was leaning against the front door of the volvo, three
cars down from me, and staring intently in my
direction. i swiftly looked away and threw the truck
into reverse, almost hitting a rusty toyota corolla in
my haste. lucky for the toyota, i stomped on the
brake in time. it was just the sort of car that my truck
53 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
would make scrap metal of. i took a deep breath, still
looking out the other side of my car, and cautiously
pulled out again, with greater success. i stared
straight ahead as i passed the volvo, but from a
peripheral peek, i would swear i saw him laughing.

54 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 phenomenon

when i opened my eyes in the morning, something
was different. it was the light. it was still the gray-
green light of a cloudy day in the forest, but it was
clearer somehow. i realized there was no fog veiling
my window.

i jumped up to look outside, and then groaned in
horror.

a fine layer of snow covered the yard, dusted the top
of my truck, and whitened the road. but that wasn't
the worst part. all the rain from yesterday had frozen
solid - coating the needles on the trees in fantastic,
gorgeous patterns, and making the driveway a deadly
ice slick. i had enough trouble not falling down when
the ground was dry; it might be safer for me to go
back to bed now.

charlie had left for work before i got downstairs. in a
lot of ways, living with charlie was like having my
own place, and i found myself reveling in the
aloneness instead of being lonely.

i threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange
juice from the carton. i felt excited to go to school,
and that scared me. i knew it wasn't the stimulating
learning environment i was anticipating, or seeing my
new set of friends. if i was being honest with myself, i
knew i was eager to get to school because i would see
edward cullen. and that was very, very stupid.

55 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i should be avoiding him entirely after my brainless
and embarrassing babbling yesterday. and i was
suspicious of him; why should he lie about his eyes? i
was still frightened of the hostility i sometimes felt
emanating from him, and i was still tongue-tied
whenever i pictured his perfect face. i was well aware
that my league and his league were spheres that did
not touch. so i shouldn't be at all anxious to see him
today. it took every ounce of my concentration to
make it down the icy brick driveway alive. i almost
lost my balance when i finally got to the truck, but i
managed to cling to the side mirror and save myself.
clearly, today was going to be nightmarish.

driving to school, i distracted myself from my fear of
falling and my unwanted speculations about edward
cullen by thinking about mike and eric, and the
obvious difference in how teenage boys responded to
me here. i was sure i looked exactly the same as i had
in phoenix. maybe it was just that the boys back
home had watched me pass slowly through all the
awkward phases of adolescence and still thought of
me that way. perhaps it was because i was a novelty
here, where novelties were few and far between.
possibly my crippling clumsiness was seen as
endearing rather than pathetic, casting me as a
damsel in distress. whatever the reason, mike's
puppy dog behavior and eric's apparent rivalry with
him were disconcerting. i wasn't sure if i didn't prefer
being ignored. my truck seemed to have no problem
with the black ice that covered the roads. i drove very
slowly, though, not wanting to carve a path of
destruction through main street.

56 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
when i got out of my truck at school, i saw why i'd
had so little trouble. something silver caught my eye,
and i walked to the back of the truck - carefully
holding the side for support - to examine my tires.
there were thin chains crisscrossed in diamond
shapes around them. charlie had gotten up who
knows how early to put snow chains on my truck. my
throat suddenly felt tight. i wasn't used to being
taken care of, and charlie's unspoken concern caught
me by surprise.

i was standing by the back corner of the truck,
struggling to fight back the sudden wave of emotion
the snow chains had brought on, when i heard an
odd sound.

it was a high-pitched screech, and it was fast
becoming painfully loud. i looked up, startled.

i saw several things simultaneously. nothing was
moving in slow motion, the way it does in the movies.
instead, the adrenaline rush seemed to make my
brain work much faster, and i was able to absorb in
clear detail several things at once.

edward cullen was standing four cars down from me,
staring at me in horror. his face stood out from a sea
of faces, all frozen in the same mask of shock. but of
more immediate importance was the dark blue van
that was skidding, tires locked and squealing against
the brakes, spinning wildly across the ice of the
parking lot. it was going to hit the back corner of my
truck, and i was standing between them. i didn't even
have time to close my eyes.

57 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
just before i heard the shattering crunch of the van
folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard,
but not from the direction i was expecting. my head
cracked against the icy blacktop, and i felt something
solid and cold pinning me to the ground. i was lying
on the pavement behind the tan car i'd parked next
to. but i didn't have a chance to notice anything else,
because the van was still coming. it had curled
gratingly around the end of the truck and, still
spinning and sliding, was about to collide with me
again.

a low oath made me aware that someone was with
me, and the voice was impossible not to recognize.
two long, white hands shot out protectively in front of
me, and the van shuddered to a stop a foot from my
face, the large hands fitting providentially into a deep
dent in the side of the van's body.

then his hands moved so fast they blurred. one was
suddenly gripping under the body of the van, and
something was dragging me, swinging my legs around
like a rag doll's, till they hit the tire of the tan car. a
groaning metallic thud hurt my ears, and the van
settled, glass popping, onto the asphalt - exactly
where, a second ago, my legs had been. it was
absolutely silent for one long second before the
screaming began. in the abrupt bedlam, i could hear
more than one person shouting my name. but more
clearly than all the yelling, i could hear edward
cullen's low, frantic voice in my ear.

"bella? are you all right?"

58 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm fine." my voice sounded strange. i tried to sit up,
and realized he was holding me against the side of his
body in an iron grasp.

"be careful," he warned as i struggled. "i think you hit
your head pretty hard."

i became aware of a throbbing ache centered above
my left ear.

"ow," i said, surprised.

"that's what i thought." his voice, amazingly,
sounded like he was suppressing laughter.

"how in the" i trailed off, trying to clear my head,
get my bearings.

"how did you get over here so fast?"

"i was standing right next to you, bella," he said, his
tone serious again.

i turned to sit up, and this time he let me, releasing
his hold around my waist and sliding as far from me
as he could in the limited space. i looked at his
concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented
again by the force of his gold-colored eyes. what was i
asking him?

and then they found us, a crowd of people with tears
streaming down their faces, shouting at each other,
shouting at us.

"don't move," someone instructed.

"get tyler out of the van!" someone else shouted.
there was a flurry of activity around us. i tried to get
59 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
up, but edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder
down.

"just stay put for now."

"but it's cold," i complained. it surprised me when he
chuckled under his breath. there was an edge to the
sound.

"you were over there," i suddenly remembered, and
his chuckle stopped short. "you were by your car."

his expression turned hard. "no, i wasn't."

"i saw you." all around us was chaos. i could hear the
gruffer voices of adults arriving on the scene. but i
obstinately held on to our argument; i was right, and
he was going to admit it.

"bella, i was standing with you, and i pulled you out
of the way." he unleashed the full, devastating power
of his eyes on me, as if trying to communicate
something crucial.

"no." i set my jaw.

the gold in his eyes blazed. "please, bella."

"why?" i demanded.

"trust me," he pleaded, his soft voice overwhelming. i
could hear the sirens now. "will you promise to
explain everything to me later?"

"fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated.

"fine," i repeated angrily.

60 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it took six emts and two teachers - mr. varner and
coach clapp - to shift the van far enough away from
us to bring the stretchers in. edward vehemently
refused his, and i tried to do the same, but the traitor
told them i'd hit my head and probably had a
concussion. i almost died of humiliation when they
put on the neck brace. it looked like the entire school
was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in the
back of the ambulance. edward got to ride in the
front. it was maddening. to make matters worse,
chief swan arrived before they could get me safely
away.

"bella!" he yelled in panic when he recognized me on
the stretcher.

"i'm completely fine, char - dad," i sighed. "there's
nothing wrong with me."

he turned to the closest emt for a second opinion. i
tuned him out to consider the jumble of inexplicable
images churning chaotically in my head. when they'd
lifted me away from the car, i had seen the deep dent
in the tan car's bumper - a very distinct dent that fit
the contours of edward's shoulders as if he had
braced himself against the car with enough force to
damage the metal frame

and then there was his family, looking on from the
distance, with expressions that ranged from
disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for
their brother's safety.

i tried to think of a logical solution that could explain
what i had just seen - a solution that excluded the
assumption that i was insane. naturally, the
61 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
ambulance got a police escort to the county hospital. i
felt ridiculous the whole time they were unloading me.
what made it worse was that edward simply glided
through the hospital doors under his own power. i
ground my teeth together.

they put me in the emergency room, a long room with
a line of beds separated by pastel-patterned curtains.
a nurse put a pressure cuff on my arm and a
thermometer under my tongue. since no one bothered
pulling the curtain around to give me some privacy, i
decided i wasn't obligated to wear the stupid-looking
neck brace anymore. when the nurse walked away, i
quickly unfastened the velcro and threw it under the
bed. there was another flurry of hospital personnel,
another stretcher brought to the bed next to me. i
recognized tyler crowley from my government class
beneath the bloodstained bandages wrapped tightly
around his head. tyler looked a hundred times worse
than i felt. but he was staring anxiously at me.

"bella, i'm so sorry!"

"i'm fine, tyler - you look awful, are you all right?"
as we spoke, nurses began unwinding his soiled
bandages, exposing a myriad of shallow slices all over
his forehead and left cheek.

he ignored me. "i thought i was going to kill you! i
was going too fast, and i hit the ice wrong" he
winced as one nurse started dabbing at his face.

"don't worry about it; you missed me."

"how did you get out of the way so fast? you were
there, and then you were gone"
62 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"umm edward pulled me out of the way."

he looked confused. "who?"

"edward cullen - he was standing next to me." i'd
always been a terrible liar; i didn't sound convincing
at all.

"cullen? i didn't see him wow, it was all so fast, i
guess. is he okay?"

"i think so. he's here somewhere, but they didn't
make him use a stretcher."

i knew i wasn't crazy. what had happened? there
was no way to explain away what i'd seen.

they wheeled me away then, to x-ray my head. i told
them there was nothing wrong, and i was right. not
even a concussion. i asked if i could leave, but the
nurse said i had to talk to a doctor first. so i was
trapped in the er, waiting, harassed by tyler's
constant apologies and promises to make it up to me.
no matter how many times i tried to convince him i
was fine, he continued to torment himself. finally, i
closed my eyes and ignored him. he kept up a
remorseful mumbling.

"is she sleeping?" a musical voice asked. my eyes flew
open. edward was standing at the foot of my bed,
smirking. i glared at him. it wasn't easy - it would
have been more natural to ogle.

"hey, edward, i'm really sorry -" tyler began.

edward lifted a hand to stop him.

63 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no blood, no foul," he said, flashing his brilliant
teeth. he moved to sit on the edge of tyler's bed,
facing me. he smirked again.

"so, what's the verdict?" he asked me.

"there's nothing wrong with me at all, but they won't
let me go," i complained. "how come you aren't
strapped to a gurney like the rest of us?"

"it's all about who you know," he answered. "but
don't worry, i came to spring you."

then a doctor walked around the corner, and my
mouth fell open. he was young, he was blond and
he was handsomer than any movie star i'd ever seen.
he was pale, though, and tired-looking, with circles
under his eyes. from charlie's description, this had
to be edward's father.

"so, miss swan," dr. cullen said in a remarkably
appealing voice, "how are you feeling?"

"i'm fine," i said, for the last time, i hoped. he walked
to the lightboard on the wall over my head, and
turned it on.

"your x-rays look good," he said. "does your head
hurt? edward said you hit it pretty hard."

"it's fine," i repeated with a sigh, throwing a quick
scowl toward edward. the doctor's cool fingers
probed lightly along my skull. he noticed when i
winced.

"tender?" he asked.

64 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"not really." i'd had worse.

i heard a chuckle, and looked over to see edward's
patronizing smile. my eyes narrowed.

"well, your father is in the waiting room - you can go
home with him now. but come back if you feel dizzy
or have trouble with your eyesight at all."

"can't i go back to school?" i asked, imagining charlie
trying to be attentive.

"maybe you should take it easy today."

i glanced at edward. "does he get to go to school?"

"someone has to spread the good news that we
survived," edward said smugly.

"actually," dr. cullen corrected, "most of the school
seems to be in the waiting room."

"oh no," i moaned, covering my face with my hands.
dr. cullen raised his eyebrows. "do you want to
stay?"

"no, no!" i insisted, throwing my legs over the side of
the bed and hopping down quickly. too quickly - i
staggered, and dr. cullen caught me. he looked
concerned.

"i'm fine," i assured him again. no need to tell him my
balance problems had nothing to do with hitting my
head.

"take some tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he
steadied me.

65 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"it doesn't hurt that bad," i insisted.

"it sounds like you were extremely lucky," dr. cullen
said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish.

"lucky edward happened to be standing next to me,"
i amended with a hard glance at the subject of my
statement.

"oh, well, yes," dr. cullen agreed, suddenly occupied
with the papers in front of him. then he looked away,
at tyler, and walked to the next bed. my intuition
flickered; the doctor was in on it.

"i'm afraid that you'll have to stay with us just a little
bit longer," he said to tyler, and began checking his
cuts.

as soon as the doctor's back was turned, i moved to
edward's side.

"can i talk to you for a minute?" i hissed under my
breath. he took a step back from me, his jaw
suddenly clenched.

"your father is waiting for you," he said through his
teeth. i glanced at dr. cullen and tyler.

"i'd like to speak with you alone, if you don't mind," i
pressed. he glared, and then turned his back and
strode down the long room. i nearly had to run to
keep up. as soon as we turned the corner into a short
hallway, he spun around to face me.

"what do you want?" he asked, sounding annoyed.
his eyes were cold. his unfriendliness intimidated me.
my words came out with less severity than i'd
66 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
intended. "you owe me an explanation," i reminded
him.

"i saved your life - i don't owe you anything." i
flinched back from the resentment in his voice. "you
promised."

"bella, you hit your head, you don't know what you're
talking about." his tone was cutting.

my temper flared now, and i glared defiantly at him.
"there's nothing wrong with my head."

he glared back. "what do you want from me, bella?"

"i want to know the truth," i said. "i want to know
why i'm lying for you."

"what do you think happened?" he snapped.

it came out in a rush.

"all i know is that you weren't anywhere near me -
tyler didn't see you, either, so don't tell me i hit my
head too hard. that van was going to crush us both
- and it didn't, and your hands left dents in the side
of it - and you left a dent in the other car, and you're
not hurt at all -

and the van should have smashed my legs, but you
were holding it up" i could hear how crazy it
sounded, and i couldn't continue. i was so mad i
could feel the tears coming; i tried to force them back
by grinding my teeth together.

he was staring at me incredulously. but his face was
tense, defensive.

67 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you think i lifted a van off you?" his tone questioned
my sanity, but it only made me more suspicious. it
was like a perfectly delivered line by a skilled actor.

i merely nodded once, jaw tight.

"nobody will believe that, you know." his voice held
an edge of derision now.

"i'm not going to tell anybody." i said each word
slowly, carefully controlling my anger.

surprise flitted across his face. "then why does it
matter?"

"it matters to me," i insisted. "i don't like to lie - so
there'd better be a good reason why i'm doing it."

"can't you just thank me and get over it?"

"thank you." i waited, fuming and expectant.

"you're not going to let it go, are you?"

"no."

"in that case i hope you enjoy disappointment." we
scowled at each other in silence. i was the first to
speak, trying to keep myself focused. i was in danger
of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. it was
like trying to stare down a destroying angel.

"why did you even bother?" i asked frigidly.

he paused, and for a brief moment his stunning face
was unexpectedly vulnerable.

"i don't know," he whispered.

68 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and then he turned his back on me and walked away.

i was so angry, it took me a few minutes until i could
move. when i could walk, i made my way slowly to
the exit at the end of the hallway. the waiting room
was more unpleasant than i'd feared. it seemed like
every face i knew in forks was there, staring at me.
charlie rushed to my side; i put up my hands.

"there's nothing wrong with me," i assured him
sullenly. i was still aggravated, not in the mood for
chitchat.

"what did the doctor say?"

"dr. cullen saw me, and he said i was fine and i
could go home." i sighed. mike and jessica and eric
were all there, beginning to converge on us. "let's go,"
i urged.

charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite
touching me, and led me to the glass doors of the exit.
i waved sheepishly at my friends, hoping to convey
that they didn't need to worry anymore. it was a huge
relief- the first time i'd ever felt that way - to get
into the cruiser. we drove in silence. i was so
wrapped up in my thoughts that i barely knew
charlie was there. i was positive that edward's
defensive behavior in the hall was a confirmation of
the bizarre things i still could hardly believe i'd
witnessed.

when we got to the house, charlie finally spoke.

"um you'll need to call rene." he hung his head,
guilty. i was appalled. "you told mom!"

69 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"sorry."

i slammed the cruiser's door a little harder than
necessary on my way out. my mom was in hysterics,
of course. i had to tell her i felt fine at least thirty
times before she would calm down. she begged me to
come home

- forgetting the fact that home was empty at the
moment - but her pleas were easier to resist than i
would have thought. i was consumed by the mystery
edward presented. and more than a little obsessed by
edward himself. stupid, stupid, stupid. i wasn't as
eager to escape forks as i should be, as any normal,
sane person would be.

i decided i might as well go to bed early that night.
charlie continued to watch me anxiously, and it was
getting on my nerves. i stopped on my way to grab
three tylenol from the bathroom. they did help, and,
as the pain eased, i drifted to sleep.

that was the first night i dreamed of edward cullen.

70 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 invitations

in my dream it was very dark, and what dim light
there was seemed to be radiating from edward's skin.
i couldn't see his face, just his back as he walked
away from me, leaving me in the blackness. no matter
how fast i ran, i couldn't catch up to him; no matter
how loud i called, he never turned. troubled, i woke
in the middle of the night and couldn't sleep again for
what seemed like a very long time. after that, he was
in my dreams nearly every night, but always on the
periphery, never within reach.

the month that followed the accident was uneasy,
tense, and, at first, embarrassing.

to my dismay, i found myself the center of attention
for the rest of that week. tyler crowley was
impossible, following me around, obsessed with
making amends to me somehow. i tried to convince
him what i wanted more than anything else was for
him to forget all about it - especially since nothing
had actually happened to me - but he remained
insistent. he followed me between classes and sat at
our now-crowded lunch table. mike and eric were
even less friendly toward him than they were to each
other, which made me worry that i'd gained another
unwelcome fan. no one seemed concerned about
edward, though i explained over and over that he was
the hero - how he had pulled me out of the way and
had nearly been crushed, too. i tried to be convincing.
jessica, mike, eric, and everyone else always

71 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
commented that they hadn't even seen him there till
the van was pulled away.

i wondered to myself why no one else had seen him
standing so far away, before he was suddenly,
impossibly saving my life. with chagrin, i realized the
probable cause - no one else was as aware of
edward as i always was. no one else watched him the
way i did. how pitiful. edward was never surrounded
by crowds of curious bystanders eager for his
firsthand account. people avoided him as usual. the
cullens and the hales sat at the same table as
always, not eating, talking only among themselves.
none of them, especially edward, glanced my way
anymore. when he sat next to me in class, as far from
me as the table would allow, he seemed totally
unaware of my presence. only now and then, when
his fists would suddenly ball up - skin stretched
even whiter over the bones - did i wonder if he
wasn't quite as oblivious as he appeared. he wished
he hadn't pulled me from the path of tyler's van -
there was no other conclusion i could come to.

i wanted very much to talk to him, and the day after
the accident i tried. the last time i'd seen him,
outside the er, we'd both been so furious. i still was
angry that he wouldn't trust me with the truth, even
though i was keeping my part of the bargain
flawlessly. but he had in fact saved my life, no matter
how he'd done it. and, overnight, the heat of my anger
faded into awed gratitude.

he was already seated when i got to biology, looking
straight ahead. i sat down, expecting him to turn

72 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
toward me. he showed no sign that he realized i was
there.

"hello, edward," i said pleasantly, to show him i was
going to behave myself.

he turned his head a fraction toward me without
meeting my gaze, nodded once, and then looked the
other way.

and that was the last contact i'd had with him,
though he was there, a foot away from me, every day.
i watched him sometimes, unable to stop myself-
from a distance, though, in the cafeteria or parking
lot. i watched as his golden eyes grew perceptibly
darker day by day. but in class i gave no more notice
that he existed than he showed toward me. i was
miserable. and the dreams continued.

despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails
alerted rene to my depression, and she called a few
times, worried. i tried to convince her it was just the
weather that had me down.

mike, at least, was pleased by the obvious coolness
between me and my lab partner. i could see he'd been
worried that edward's daring rescue might have
impressed me, and he was relieved that it seemed to
have the opposite effect. he grew more confident,
sitting on the edge of my table to talk before biology
class started, ignoring edward as completely as he
ignored us.

the snow washed away for good after that one
dangerously icy day. mike was disappointed he'd
never gotten to stage his snowball fight, but pleased
73 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
that the beach trip would soon be possible. the rain
continued heavily, though, and the weeks passed.

jessica made me aware of another event looming on
the horizon - she called the first tuesday of march to
ask my permission to invite mike to the girls' choice
spring dance in two weeks.

"are you sure you don't mind you weren't planning
to ask him?" she persisted when i told her i didn't
mind in the least.

"no, jess, i'm not going," i assured her. dancing was
glaringly outside my range of abilities.

"it will be really fun." her attempt to convince me was
halfhearted. i suspected that jessica enjoyed my
inexplicable popularity more than my actual
company.

"you have fun with mike," i encouraged.

the next day, i was surprised that jessica wasn't her
usual gushing self in trig and spanish. she was
silent as she walked by my side between classes, and
i was afraid to ask her why. if mike had turned her
down, i was the last person she would want to tell.

my fears were strengthened during lunch when
jessica sat as far from mike as possible, chatting
animatedly with eric. mike was unusually quiet. mike
was still quiet as he walked me to class, the
uncomfortable look on his face a bad sign. but he
didn't broach the subject until i was in my seat and
he was perched on my desk. as always, i was
electrically aware of edward sitting close enough to

74 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
touch, as distant as if he were merely an invention of
my imagination.

"so," mike said, looking at the floor, "jessica asked
me to the spring dance."

"that's great." i made my voice bright and
enthusiastic. "you'll have a lot of fun with jessica."

"well" he floundered as he examined my smile,
clearly not happy with my response. "i told her i had
to think about it."

"why would you do that?" i let disapproval color my
tone, though i was relieved he hadn't given her an
absolute no.

his face was bright red as he looked down again. pity
shook my resolve.

"i was wondering if well, if you might be planning to
ask me." i paused for a moment, hating the wave of
guilt that swept through me. but i saw, from the
corner of my eye, edward's head tilt reflexively in my
direction.

"mike, i think you should tell her yes," i said.

"did you already ask someone?" did edward notice
how mike's eyes flickered in his direction?

"no," i assured him. "i'm not going to the dance at
all."

"why not?" mike demanded.

i didn't want to get into the safety hazards that
dancing presented, so i quickly made new plans.
75 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm going to seattle that saturday," i explained. i
needed to get out of town anyway - it was suddenly
the perfect time to go.

"can't you go some other weekend?"

"sorry, no," i said. "so you shouldn't make jess wait
any longer - it's rude."

"yeah, you're right," he mumbled, and turned,
dejected, to walk back to his seat. i closed my eyes
and pressed my fingers to my temples, trying to push
the guilt and sympathy out of my head. mr. banner
began talking. i sighed and opened my eyes.

and edward was staring at me curiously, that same,
familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in
his black eyes.

i stared back, surprised, expecting him to look
quickly away. but instead he continued to gaze with
probing intensity into my eyes. there was no question
of me looking away. my hands started to shake.

"mr. cullen?" the teacher called, seeking the answer
to a question that i hadn't heard.

"the krebs cycle," edward answered, seeming
reluctant as he turned to look at mr. banner.

i looked down at my book as soon as his eyes released
me, trying to find my place. cowardly as ever, i
shifted my hair over my right shoulder to hide my
face. i couldn't believe the rush of emotion pulsing
through me -

76 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
just because he'd happened to look at me for the first
time in a half-dozen weeks. i couldn't allow him to
have this level of influence over me. it was pathetic.
more than pathetic, it was unhealthy. i tried very
hard not to be aware of him for the rest of the hour,
and, since that was impossible, at least not to let him
know that i was aware of him. when the bell rang at
last, i turned my back to him to gather my things,
expecting him to leave immediately as usual.

"bella?" his voice shouldn't have been so familiar to
me, as if i'd known the sound of it all my life rather
than for just a few short weeks. i turned slowly,
unwillingly. i didn't want to feel what i knew i would
feel when i looked at his too-perfect face. my
expression was wary when i finally turned to him; his
expression was unreadable. he didn't say anything.

"what? are you speaking to me again?" i finally
asked, an unintentional note of petulance in my
voice.

his lips twitched, fighting a smile. "no, not really," he
admitted. i closed my eyes and inhaled slowly
through my nose, aware that i was gritting my teeth.
he waited.

"then what do you want, edward?" i asked, keeping
my eyes closed; it was easier to talk to him coherently
that way.

"i'm sorry." he sounded sincere. "i'm being very rude,
i know. but it's better this way, really."

i opened my eyes. his face was very serious.

77 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i don't know what you mean," i said, my voice
guarded.

"it's better if we're not friends," he explained. "trust
me." my eyes narrowed. i'd heard that before.

"it's too bad you didn't figure that out earlier," i
hissed through my teeth. "you could have saved
yourself all this regret."

"regret?" the word, and my tone, obviously caught
him off guard. "regret for what?"

"for not just letting that stupid van squish me." he
was astonished. he stared at me in disbelief.

when he finally spoke, he almost sounded mad. "you
think i regret saving your life?"

"i know you do," i snapped.

"you don't know anything." he was definitely mad. i
turned my head sharply away from him, clenching my
jaw against all the wild accusations i wanted to hurl
at him. i gathered my books together, then stood and
walked to the door. i meant to sweep dramatically out
of the room, but of course i caught the toe of my boot
on the door jamb and dropped my books. i stood
there for a moment, thinking about leaving them.
then i sighed and bent to pick them up. he was
there; he'd already stacked them into a pile. he
handed them to me, his face hard.

"thank you," i said icily.

his eyes narrowed.

78 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you're welcome," he retorted.

i straightened up swiftly, turned away from him
again, and stalked off to gym without looking back.

gym was brutal. we'd moved on to basketball. my
team never passed me the ball, so that was good, but
i fell down a lot. sometimes i took people with me.
today i was worse than usual because my head was
so filled with edward. i tried to concentrate on my
feet, but he kept creeping back into my thoughts just
when i really needed my balance.

it was a relief, as always, to leave. i almost ran to the
truck; there were just so many people i wanted to
avoid. the truck had suffered only minimal damage in
the accident. i'd had to replace the taillights, and if i'd
had a real paint job, i would have touched that up.
tyler's parents had to sell their van for parts.

i almost had a stroke when i rounded the corner and
saw a tall, dark figure leaning against the side of my
truck. then i realized it was just eric. i started
walking again.

"hey, eric," i called.

"hi, bella."

"what's up?" i said as i was unlocking the door. i
wasn't paying attention to the uncomfortable edge in
his voice, so his next words took me by surprise.

"uh, i was just wondering if you would go to the
spring dance with me?" his voice broke on the last
word.

79 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i thought it was girls' choice," i said, too startled to
be diplomatic.

"well, yeah," he admitted, shamefaced.

i recovered my composure and tried to make my smile
warm. "thank you for asking me, but i'm going to be
in seattle that day."

"oh," he said. "well, maybe next time."

"sure," i agreed, and then bit my lip. i wouldn't want
him to take that too literally.

he slouched off, back toward the school. i heard a low
chuckle. edward was walking past the front of my
truck, looking straight forward, his lips pressed
together. i yanked the door open and jumped inside,
slamming it loudly behind me. i revved the engine
deafeningly and reversed out into the aisle. edward
was in his car already, two spaces down, sliding out
smoothly in front of me, cutting me off. he stopped
there - to wait for his family; i could see the four of
them walking this way, but still by the cafeteria. i
considered taking out the rear of his shiny volvo, but
there were too many witnesses. i looked in my
rearview mirror. a line was beginning to form. directly
behind me, tyler crowley was in his recently acquired
used sentra, waving. i was too aggravated to
acknowledge him.

while i was sitting there, looking everywhere but at
the car in front of me, i heard a knock on my
passenger side window. i looked over; it was tyler. i
glanced back in my rearview mirror, confused. his car
was still running, the door left open. i leaned across
80 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the cab to crank the window down. it was stiff. i got it
halfway down, then gave up.

"i'm sorry, tyler, i'm stuck behind cullen." i was
annoyed - obviously the holdup wasn't my fault.

"oh, i know - i just wanted to ask you something
while we're trapped here." he grinned.

this could not be happening.

"will you ask me to the spring dance?" he continued.

"i'm not going to be in town, tyler." my voice sounded
a little sharp. i had to remember it wasn't his fault
that mike and eric had already used up my quota of
patience for the day.

"yeah, mike said that," he admitted.

"then why -"

he shrugged. "i was hoping you were just letting him
down easy." okay, it was completely his fault.

"sorry, tyler," i said, working to hide my irritation. "i
really am going out of town."

"that's cool. we still have prom."

and before i could respond, he was walking back to
his car. i could feel the shock on my face. i looked
forward to see alice, rosalie, emmett, and jasper all
sliding into the volvo. in his rearview mirror,
edward's eyes were on me. he was unquestionably
shaking with laughter, as if he'd heard every word
tyler had said. my foot itched toward the gas pedal

81 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
one little bump wouldn't hurt any of them, just that
glossy silver paint job. i revved the engine.

but they were all in, and edward was speeding away.
i drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself the
whole way.

when i got home, i decided to make chicken
enchiladas for dinner. it was a long process, and it
would keep me busy. while i was simmering the
onions and chilies, the phone rang. i was almost
afraid to answer it, but it might be charlie or my
mom.

it was jessica, and she was jubilant; mike had caught
her after school to accept her invitation. i celebrated
with her briefly while i stirred. she had to go, she
wanted to call angela and lauren to tell them. i
suggested - with casual innocence - that maybe
angela, the shy girl who had biology with me, could
ask eric. and lauren, a standoffish girl who had
always ignored me at the lunch table, could ask tyler;
i'd heard he was still available. jess thought that was
a great idea. now that she was sure of mike, she
actually sounded sincere when she said she wished i
would go to the dance. i gave her my seattle excuse.

after i hung up, i tried to concentrate on dinner -
dicing the chicken especially; i didn't want to take
another trip to the emergency room. but my head was
spinning, trying to analyze every word edward had
spoken today. what did he mean, it was better if we
weren't friends?

my stomach twisted as i realized what he must have
meant. he must see how absorbed i was by him; he
82 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
must not want to lead me on so we couldn't even be
friends because he wasn't interested in me at all. of
course he wasn't interested in me, i thought angrily,
my eyes stinging - a delayed reaction to the onions. i
wasn't interesting. and he was. interesting and
brilliant and mysterious and perfect and
beautiful

and possibly able to lift full-sized vans with one hand.

well, that was fine. i could leave him alone. i would
leave him alone. i would get through my self-imposed
sentence here in purgatory, and then hopefully some
school in the southwest, or possibly hawaii, would
offer me a scholarship. i focused my thoughts on
sunny beaches and palm trees as i finished the
enchiladas and put them in the oven.

charlie seemed suspicious when he came home and
smelled the green peppers. i couldn't blame him -
the closest edible mexican food was probably in
southern california. but he was a cop, even if just a
small-town cop, so he was brave enough to take the
first bite. he seemed to like it. it was fun to watch as
he slowly began trusting me in the kitchen.

"dad?" i asked when he was almost done.

"yeah, bella?"

"um, i just wanted to let you know that i'm going to
seattle for the day a week from saturday if that's
okay?" i didn't want to ask permission -

it set a bad precedent - but i felt rude, so i tacked it
on at the end.

83 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why?" he sounded surprised, as if he were unable to
imagine something that forks couldn't offer.

"well, i wanted to get few books - the library here is
pretty limited - and maybe look at some clothes." i
had more money than i was used to having, since,
thanks to charlie, i hadn't had to pay for a car. not
that the truck didn't cost me quite a bit in the gas
department.

"that truck probably doesn't get very good gas
mileage," he said, echoing my thoughts.

"i know, i'll stop in montesano and olympia - and
tacoma if i have to."

"are you going all by yourself?" he asked, and i
couldn't tell if he was suspicious i had a secret
boyfriend or just worried about car trouble.

"yes."

"seattle is a big city - you could get lost," he fretted.

"dad, phoenix is five times the size of seattle - and i
can read a map, don't worry about it."

"do you want me to come with you?"

i tried to be crafty as i hid my horror.

"that's all right, dad, i'll probably just be in dressing
rooms all day - very boring."

"oh, okay." the thought of sitting in women's clothing
stores for any period of time immediately put him off.

"thanks." i smiled at him.

84 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"will you be back in time for the dance?"

grrr. only in a town this small would a father know
when the high school dances were.

"no - i don't dance, dad." he, of all people, should
understand that - i didn't get my balance problems
from my mother.

he did understand. "oh, that's right," he realized. the
next morning, when i pulled into the parking lot, i
deliberately parked as far as possible from the silver
volvo. i didn't want to put myself in the path of too
much temptation and end up owing him a new car.
getting out of the cab, i fumbled with my key and it
fell into a puddle at my feet. as i bent to get it, a
white hand flashed out and grabbed it before i could.
i jerked upright. edward cullen was right next to me,
leaning casually against my truck.

"how do you do that?" i asked in amazed irritation.

"do what?" he held my key out as he spoke. as i
reached for it, he dropped it into my palm.

"appear out of thin air."

"bella, it's not my fault if you are exceptionally
unobservant." his voice was quiet as usual - velvet,
muted.

i scowled at his perfect face. his eyes were light again
today, a deep, golden honey color. then i had to look
down, to reassemble my now-tangled thoughts.

85 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why the traffic jam last night?" i demanded, still
looking away. "i thought you were supposed to be
pretending i don't exist, not irritating me to death."

"that was for tyler's sake, not mine. i had to give him
his chance." he snickered.

"you" i gasped. i couldn't think of a bad enough
word. it felt like the heat of my anger should
physically burn him, but he only seemed more
amused.

"and i'm not pretending you don't exist," he
continued.

"so you are trying to irritate me to death? since
tyler's van didn't do the job?"

anger flashed in his tawny eyes. his lips pressed into
a hard line, all signs of humor gone.

"bella, you are utterly absurd," he said, his low voice
cold. my palms tingled - i wanted so badly to hit
something. i was surprised at myself. i was usually a
nonviolent person. i turned my back and started to
walk away.

"wait," he called. i kept walking, sloshing angrily
through the rain. but he was next to me, easily
keeping pace.

"i'm sorry, that was rude," he said as we walked. i
ignored him. "i'm not saying it isn't true," he
continued, "but it was rude to say it, anyway."

"why won't you leave me alone?" i grumbled.

86 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i wanted to ask you something, but you sidetracked
me," he chuckled. he seemed to have recovered his
good humor.

"do you have a multiple personality disorder?" i asked
severely.

"you're doing it again."

i sighed. "fine then. what do you want to ask?"

"i was wondering if, a week from saturday - you
know, the day of the spring dance -"

"are you trying to be funny?" i interrupted him,
wheeling toward him. my face got drenched as i
looked up at his expression.

his eyes were wickedly amused. "will you please allow
me to finish?" i bit my lip and clasped my hands
together, interlocking my fingers, so i couldn't do
anything rash.

"i heard you say you were going to seattle that day,
and i was wondering if you wanted a ride."

that was unexpected.

"what?" i wasn't sure what he was getting at.

"do you want a ride to seattle?"

"with who?" i asked, mystified.

"myself, obviously." he enunciated every syllable, as if
he were talking to someone mentally handicapped.

i was still stunned. "why?"

87 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"well, i was planning to go to seattle in the next few
weeks, and, to be honest, i'm not sure if your truck
can make it."

"my truck works just fine, thank you very much for
your concern." i started to walk again, but i was too
surprised to maintain the same level of anger.

"but can your truck make it there on one tank of
gas?" he matched my pace again.

"i don't see how that is any of your business." stupid,
shiny volvo owner.

"the wasting of finite resources is everyone's
business."

"honestly, edward." i felt a thrill go through me as i
said his name, and i hated it. "i can't keep up with
you. i thought you didn't want to be my friend."

"i said it would be better if we weren't friends, not
that i didn't want to be."

"oh, thanks, now that's all cleared up." heavy
sarcasm. i realized i had stopped walking again. we
were under the shelter of the cafeteria roof now, so i
could more easily look at his face. which certainly
didn't help my clarity of thought.

"it would be more prudent for you not to be my
friend," he explained.

"but i'm tired of trying to stay away from you, bella."
his eyes were gloriously intense as he uttered that
last sentence, his voice smoldering. i couldn't
remember how to breathe.
88 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"will you go with me to seattle?" he asked, still
intense. i couldn't speak yet, so i just nodded.

he smiled briefly, and then his face became serious.

"you really should stay away from me," he warned.
"i'll see you in class." he turned abruptly and walked
back the way we'd come.

89 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 blood type

i made my way to english in a daze. i didn't even
realize when i first walked in that class had already
started.

"thank you for joining us, miss swan," mr. mason
said in a disparaging tone.

i flushed and hurried to my seat.

it wasn't till class ended that i realized mike wasn't
sitting in his usual seat next to me. i felt a twinge of
guilt. but he and eric both met me at the door as
usual, so i figured i wasn't totally unforgiven. mike
seemed to become more himself as we walked, gaining
enthusiasm as he talked about the weather report for
this weekend. the rain was supposed to take a minor
break, and so maybe his beach trip would be
possible. i tried to sound eager, to make up for
disappointing him yesterday. it was hard; rain or no
rain, it would still only be in the high forties, if we
were lucky.

the rest of the morning passed in a blur. it was
difficult to believe that i hadn't just imagined what
edward had said, and the way his eyes had looked.
maybe it was just a very convincing dream that i'd
confused with reality. that seemed more probable
than that i really appealed to him on any level.

so i was impatient and frightened as jessica and i
entered the cafeteria. i wanted to see his face, to see if

90 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he'd gone back to the cold, indifferent person i'd
known for the last several weeks. or if, by some
miracle, i'd really heard what i thought i'd heard this
morning. jessica babbled on and on about her dance
plans - lauren and angela had asked the other boys
and they were all going together - completely
unaware of my inattention.

disappointment flooded through me as my eyes
unerringly focused on his table. the other four were
there, but he was absent. had he gone home? i
followed the still-babbling jessica through the line,
crushed. i'd lost my appetite - i bought nothing but
a bottle of lemonade. i just wanted to go sit down and
sulk.

"edward cullen is staring at you again," jessica said,
finally breaking through my abstraction with his
name. "i wonder why he's sitting alone today."

my head snapped up. i followed her gaze to see
edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me from an
empty table across the cafeteria from where he
usually sat. once he'd caught my eye, he raised one
hand and motioned with his index finger for me to
join him. as i stared in disbelief, he winked.

"does he mean you?" jessica asked with insulting
astonishment in her voice.

"maybe he needs help with his biology homework," i
muttered for her benefit. "um, i'd better go see what
he wants." i could feel her staring after me as i
walked away.

91 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
when i reached his table, i stood behind the chair
across from him, unsure.

"why don't you sit with me today?" he asked, smiling.
i sat down automatically, watching him with caution.
he was still smiling. it was hard to believe that
someone so beautiful could be real. i was afraid that
he might disappear in a sudden puff of smoke, and i
would wake up.

he seemed to be waiting for me to say something.

"this is different," i finally managed.

"well" he paused, and then the rest of the words
followed in a rush. "i decided as long as i was going to
hell, i might as well do it thoroughly." i waited for him
to say something that made sense. the seconds
ticked by.

"you know i don't have any idea what you mean," i
eventually pointed out.

"i know." he smiled again, and then he changed the
subject. "i think your friends are angry with me for
stealing you."

"they'll survive." i could feel their stares boring into
my back.

"i may not give you back, though," he said with a
wicked glint in his eyes.

i gulped.

he laughed. "you look worried."

92 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no," i said, but, ridiculously, my voice broke.
"surprised, actually

what brought all this on?"

"i told you - i got tired of trying to stay away from
you. so i'm giving up." he was still smiling, but his
ocher eyes were serious.

"giving up?" i repeated in confusion.

"yes - giving up trying to be good. i'm just going to
do what i want now, and let the chips fall where they
may." his smile faded as he explained, and a hard
edge crept into his voice.

"you lost me again."

the breathtaking crooked smile reappeared.

"i always say too much when i'm talking to you -
that's one of the problems."

"don't worry - i don't understand any of it," i said
wryly.

"i'm counting on that."

"so, in plain english, are we friends now?"

"friends" he mused, dubious.

"or not," i muttered.

he grinned. "well, we can try, i suppose. but i'm
warning you now that i'm not a good friend for you."
behind his smile, the warning was real.

93 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you say that a lot," i noted, trying to ignore the
sudden trembling in my stomach and keep my voice
even.

"yes, because you're not listening to me. i'm still
waiting for you to believe it. if you're smart, you'll
avoid me."

"i think you've made your opinion on the subject of
my intellect clear, too." my eyes narrowed.

he smiled apologetically.

"so, as long as i'm being not smart, we'll try to be
friends?" i struggled to sum up the confusing
exchange.

"that sounds about right."

i looked down at my hands wrapped around the
lemonade bottle, not sure what to do now.

"what are you thinking?" he asked curiously.

i looked up into his deep gold eyes, became
befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth.

"i'm trying to figure out what you are."

his jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with
some effort.

"are you having any luck with that?" he asked in an
offhand tone.

"not too much," i admitted.

he chuckled. "what are your theories?"

94 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i blushed. i had been vacillating during the last
month between bruce wayne and peter parker. there
was no way i was going to own up to that.

"won't you tell me?" he asked, tilting his head to one
side with a shockingly tempting smile.

i shook my head. "too embarrassing."

"that's really frustrating, you know," he complained.

"no," i disagreed quickly, my eyes narrowing, "i can't
imagine why that would be frustrating at all - just
because someone refuses to tell you what they're
thinking, even if all the while they're making cryptic
little remarks specifically designed to keep you up at
night wondering what they could possibly mean
now, why would that be frustrating?" he grimaced.

"or better," i continued, the pent-up annoyance
flowing freely now, "say that person also did a wide
range of bizarre things - from saving your life under
impossible circumstances one day to treating you like
a pariah the next, and he never explained any of that,
either, even after he promised. that, also, would be
very non-frustrating."

"you've got a bit of a temper, don't you?"

"i don't like double standards."

we stared at each other, unsmiling.

he glanced over my shoulder, and then,
unexpectedly, he snickered.

"what?"

95 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"your boyfriend seems to think i'm being unpleasant
to you - he's debating whether or not to come break
up our fight." he snickered again.

"i don't know who you're talking about," i said frostily.
"but i'm sure you're wrong, anyway."

"i'm not. i told you, most people are easy to read."

"except me, of course."

"yes. except for you." his mood shifted suddenly; his
eyes turned brooding. "i wonder why that is."

i had to look away from the intensity of his stare. i
concentrated on unscrewing the lid of my lemonade. i
took a swig, staring at the table without seeing it.

"aren't you hungry?" he asked, distracted.

"no." i didn't feel like mentioning that my stomach
was already full - of butterflies. "you?" i looked at
the empty table in front of him.

"no, i'm not hungry." i didn't understand his
expression - it looked like he was enjoying some
private joke.

"can you do me a favor?" i asked after a second of
hesitation. he was suddenly wary. "that depends on
what you want."

"it's not much," i assured him.

he waited, guarded but curious.

"i just wondered if you could warn me beforehand
the next time you decide to ignore me for my own

96 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
good. just so i'm prepared." i looked at the lemonade
bottle as i spoke, tracing the circle of the opening with
my pinkie finger.

"that sounds fair." he was pressing his lips together
to keep from laughing when i looked up.

"thanks."

"then can i have one answer in return?" he
demanded.

"one."

"tell me one theory."

whoops. "not that one."

"you didn't qualify, you just promised one answer," he
reminded me.

"and you've broken promises yourself," i reminded
him back.

"just one theory - i won't laugh."

"yes, you will." i was positive about that.

he looked down, and then glanced up at me through
his long black lashes, his ocher eyes scorching.

"please?" he breathed, leaning toward me.

i blinked, my mind going blank. holy crow, how did
he do that?

"er, what?" i asked, dazed.

97 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"please tell me just one little theory." his eyes still
smoldered at me.

"um, well, bitten by a radioactive spider?" was he a
hypnotist, too? or was i just a hopeless pushover?

"that's not very creative," he scoffed.

"i'm sorry, that's all i've got," i said, miffed.

"you're not even close," he teased.

"no spiders?"

"nope."

"and no radioactivity?"

"none."

"dang," i sighed.

"kryptonite doesn't bother me, either," he chuckled.

"you're not supposed to laugh, remember?"

he struggled to compose his face.

"i'll figure it out eventually," i warned him.

"i wish you wouldn't try." he was serious again.

"because ?"

"what if i'm not a superhero? what if i'm the bad
guy?" he smiled playfully, but his eyes were
impenetrable.

"oh," i said, as several things he'd hinted fell
suddenly into place. "i see."

98 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"do you?" his face was abruptly severe, as if he were
afraid that he'd accidentally said too much.

"you're dangerous?" i guessed, my pulse quickening
as i intuitively realized the truth of my own words. he
was dangerous. he'd been trying to tell me that all
along.

he just looked at me, eyes full of some emotion i
couldn't comprehend.

"but not bad," i whispered, shaking my head. "no, i
don't believe that you're bad."

"you're wrong." his voice was almost inaudible. he
looked down, stealing my bottle lid and then spinning
it on its side between his fingers. i stared at him,
wondering why i didn't feel afraid. he meant what he
was saying - that was obvious. but i just felt
anxious, on edge and, more than anything else,
fascinated. the same way i always felt when i was
near him.

the silence lasted until i noticed that the cafeteria
was almost empty. i jumped to my feet. "we're going
to be late."

"i'm not going to class today," he said, twirling the lid
so fast it was just a blur.

"why not?"

"it's healthy to ditch class now and then." he smiled
up at me, but his eyes were still troubled.

"well, i'm going," i told him. i was far too big a coward
to risk getting caught.
99 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he turned his attention back to his makeshift top. "i'll
see you later, then."

i hesitated, torn, but then the first bell sent me
hurrying out the door

- with a last glance confirming that he hadn't moved
a centimeter. as i half-ran to class, my head was
spinning faster than the bottle cap. so few questions
had been answered in comparison to how many new
questions had been raised. at least the rain had
stopped. i was lucky; mr. banner wasn't in the room
yet when i arrived. i settled quickly into my seat,
aware that both mike and angela were staring at me.
mike looked resentful; angela looked surprised, and
slightly awed. mr. banner came in the room then,
calling the class to order. he was juggling a few small
cardboard boxes in his arms. he put them down on
mike's table, telling him to start passing them around
the class.

"okay, guys, i want you all to take one piece from
each box," he said as he produced a pair of rubber
gloves from the pocket of his lab jacket and pulled
them on. the sharp sound as the gloves snapped into
place against his wrists seemed ominous to me. "the
first should be an indicator card," he went on,
grabbing a white card with four squares marked on it
and displaying it. "the second is a four-pronged
applicator -" he held up something that looked like a
nearly toothless hair pick "- and the third is a sterile
micro-lancet." he held up a small piece of blue plastic
and split it open. the barb was invisible from this
distance, but my stomach flipped.

100 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'll be coming around with a dropper of water to
prepare your cards, so please don't start until i get to
you." he began at mike's table again, carefully putting
one drop of water in each of the four squares. "then i
want you to carefully prick your finger with the
lancet" he grabbed mike's hand and jabbed the
spike into the tip of mike's middle finger. oh no.
clammy moisture broke out across my forehead.

"put a small drop of blood on each of the prongs." he
demonstrated, squeezing mike's finger till the blood
flowed. i swallowed convulsively, my stomach
heaving.

"and then apply it to the card," he finished, holding
up the dripping red card for us to see. i closed my
eyes, trying to hear through the ringing in my ears.

"the red cross is having a blood drive in port angeles
next weekend, so i thought you should all know your
blood type." he sounded proud of himself. "those of
you who aren't eighteen yet will need a parent's
permission - i have slips at my desk."

he continued through the room with his water drops.
i put my cheek against the cool black tabletop and
tried to hold on to my consciousness. all around me i
could hear squeals, complaints, and giggles as my
classmates skewered their fingers. i breathed slowly
in and out through my mouth.

"bella, are you all right?" mr. banner asked. his voice
was close to my head, and it sounded alarmed.

"i already know my blood type, mr. banner," i said in
a weak voice. i was afraid to raise my head.
101 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"are you feeling faint?"

"yes, sir," i muttered, internally kicking myself for not
ditching when i had the chance.

"can someone take bella to the nurse, please?" he
called. i didn't have to look up to know that it would
be mike who volunteered.

"can you walk?" mr. banner asked.

"yes," i whispered. just let me get out of here, i
thought. i'll crawl. mike seemed eager as he put his
arm around my waist and pulled my arm over his
shoulder. i leaned against him heavily on the way out
of the classroom.

mike towed me slowly across campus. when we were
around the edge of the cafeteria, out of sight of
building four in case mr. banner was watching, i
stopped.

"just let me sit for a minute, please?" i begged. he
helped me sit on the edge of the walk.

"and whatever you do, keep your hand in your
pocket," i warned. i was still so dizzy. i slumped over
on my side, putting my cheek against the freezing,
damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. that
seemed to help a little.

"wow, you're green, bella," mike said nervously.

"bella?" a different voice called from the distance. no!
please let me be imagining that horribly familiar
voice.

102 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what's wrong - is she hurt?" his voice was closer
now, and he sounded upset. i wasn't imagining it. i
squeezed my eyes shut, hoping to die. or, at the very
least, not to throw up.

mike seemed stressed. "i think she's fainted. i don't
know what happened, she didn't even stick her
finger."

"bella." edward's voice was right beside me, relieved
now. "can you hear me?"

"no," i groaned. "go away."

he chuckled.

"i was taking her to the nurse," mike explained in a
defensive tone, "but she wouldn't go any farther."

"i'll take her," edward said. i could hear the smile still
in his voice.

"you can go back to class."

"no," mike protested. "i'm supposed to do it."
suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me.
my eyes flew open in shock. edward had scooped me
up in his arms, as easily as if i weighed ten pounds
instead of a hundred and ten.

"put me down!" please, please let me not vomit on
him. he was walking before i was finished talking.

"hey!" mike called, already ten paces behind us.
edward ignored him. "you look awful," he told me,
grinning.

103 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"put me back on the sidewalk," i moaned. the rocking
movement of his walk was not helping. he held me
away from his body, gingerly, supporting all my
weight with just his arms - it didn't seem to bother
him.

"so you faint at the sight of blood?" he asked. this
seemed to entertain him.

i didn't answer. i closed my eyes again and fought the
nausea with all my strength, clamping my lips
together.

"and not even your own blood," he continued,
enjoying himself. i don't know how he opened the
door while carrying me, but it was suddenly warm, so
i knew we were inside.

"oh my," i heard a female voice gasp.

"she fainted in biology," edward explained.

i opened my eyes. i was in the office, and edward was
striding past the front counter toward the nurse's
door. ms. cope, the redheaded front office
receptionist, ran ahead of him to hold it open. the
grandmotherly nurse looked up from a novel,
astonished, as edward swung me into the room and
placed me gently on the crackly paper that covered
the brown vinyl mattress on the one cot. then he
moved to stand against the wall as far across the
narrow room as possible. his eyes were bright,
excited.

"she's just a little faint," he reassured the startled
nurse. "they're blood typing in biology."

104 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the nurse nodded sagely. "there's always one."

he muffled a snicker.

"just lie down for a minute, honey; it'll pass."

"i know," i sighed. the nausea was already fading.

"does this happen a lot?" she asked.

"sometimes," i admitted. edward coughed to hide
another laugh.

"you can go back to class now," she told him.

"i'm supposed to stay with her." he said this with
such assured authority that - even though she
pursed her lips - the nurse didn't argue it further.

"i'll go get you some ice for your forehead, dear," she
said to me, and then bustled out of the room.

"you were right," i moaned, letting my eyes close.

"i usually am - but about what in particular this
time?"

"ditching is healthy." i practiced breathing evenly.

"you scared me for a minute there," he admitted after
a pause. his tone made it sound like he was
confessing a humiliating weakness. "i thought newton
was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the
woods."

"ha ha." i still had my eyes closed, but i was feeling
more normal every minute.

105 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"honestly - i've seen corpses with better color. i was
concerned that i might have to avenge your murder."

"poor mike. i'll bet he's mad."

"he absolutely loathes me," edward said cheerfully.

"you can't know that," i argued, but then i wondered
suddenly if he could.

"i saw his face - i could tell."

"how did you see me? i thought you were ditching." i
was almost fine now, though the queasiness would
probably pass faster if i'd eaten something for lunch.
on the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach
was empty.

"i was in my car, listening to a cd." such a normal
response - it surprised me.

i heard the door and opened my eyes to see the nurse
with a cold compress in her hand.

"here you go, dear." she laid it across my forehead.
"you're looking better," she added.

"i think i'm fine," i said, sitting up. just a little
ringing in my ears, no spinning. the mint green walls
stayed where they should. i could see she was about
to make me lie back down, but the door opened just
then, and ms. cope stuck her head in.

"we've got another one," she warned.

i hopped down to free up the cot for the next invalid.

106 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i handed the compress back to the nurse. "here, i
don't need this." and then mike staggered through the
door, now supporting a sallow-looking lee stephens,
another boy in our biology class. edward and i drew
back against the wall to give them room.

"oh no," edward muttered. "go out to the office,
bella." i looked up at him, bewildered.

"trust me - go."

i spun and caught the door before it closed, darting
out of the infirmary. i could feel edward right behind
me.

"you actually listened to me." he was stunned.

"i smelled the blood," i said, wrinkling my nose. lee
wasn't sick from watching other people, like me.

"people can't smell blood," he contradicted.

"well, i can - that's what makes me sick. it smells
like rust and salt." he was staring at me with an
unfathomable expression.

"what?" i asked.

"it's nothing."

mike came through the door then, glancing from me
to edward. the look he gave edward confirmed what
edward had said about loathing. he looked back at
me, his eyes glum.

"you look better," he accused.

107 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"just keep your hand in your pocket," i warned him
again.

"it's not bleeding anymore," he muttered. "are you
going back to class?"

"are you kidding? i'd just have to turn around and
come back."

"yeah, i guess so are you going this weekend? to
the beach?" while he spoke, he flashed another glare
toward edward, who was standing against the
cluttered counter, motionless as a sculpture, staring
off into space. i tried to sound as friendly as possible.
"sure, i said i was in."

"we're meeting at my dad's store, at ten." his eyes
flickered to edward again, wondering if he was giving
out too much information. his body language made it
clear that it wasn't an open invitation.

"i'll be there," i promised.

"i'll see you in gym, then," he said, moving
uncertainly toward the door.

"see you," i replied. he looked at me once more, his
round face slightly pouting, and then as he walked
slowly through the door, his shoulders slumped. a
swell of sympathy washed over me. i pondered seeing
his disappointed face again in gym.

"gym," i groaned.

"i can take care of that." i hadn't noticed edward
moving to my side, but he spoke now in my ear. "go
sit down and look pale," he muttered. that wasn't a
108 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
challenge; i was always pale, and my recent swoon
had left a light sheen of sweat on my face. i sat in one
of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head
against the wall with my eyes closed. fainting spells
always exhausted me.

i heard edward speaking softly at the counter.

"ms. cope?"

"yes?" i hadn't heard her return to her desk.

"bella has gym next hour, and i don't think she feels
well enough. actually, i was thinking i should take
her home now. do you think you could excuse her
from class?" his voice was like melting honey. i could
imagine how much more overwhelming his eyes
would be.

"do you need to be excused, too, edward?" ms. cope
fluttered. why couldn't i do that?

"no, i have mrs. goff, she won't mind."

"okay, it's all taken care of. you feel better, bella,"
she called to me. i nodded weakly, hamming it up just
a bit.

"can you walk, or do you want me to carry you
again?" with his back to the receptionist, his
expression became sarcastic.

"i'll walk."

i stood carefully, and i was still fine. he held the door
for me, his smile polite but his eyes mocking. i walked
out into the cold, fine mist that had just begun to fall.

109 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it felt nice - the first time i'd enjoyed the constant
moisture falling out of the sky - as it washed my face
clean of the sticky perspiration.

"thanks," i said as he followed me out. "it's almost
worth getting sick to miss gym."

"anytime." he was staring straight forward, squinting
into the rain.

"so are you going? this saturday, i mean?" i was
hoping he would, though it seemed unlikely. i
couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the
rest of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the
same world. but just hoping that he might gave me
the first twinge of enthusiasm i'd felt for the outing.

"where are you all going, exactly?" he was still
looking ahead, expressionless.

"down to la push, to first beach." i studied his face,
trying to read it. his eyes seemed to narrow
infinitesimally.

he glanced down at me from the corner of his eye,
smiling wryly. "i really don't think i was invited."

i sighed. "i just invited you."

"let's you and i not push poor mike any further this
week. we don't want him to snap." his eyes danced;
he was enjoying the idea more than he should.

"mike-schmike." i muttered, preoccupied by the way
he'd said "you and i." i liked it more than i should.

110 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
we were near the parking lot now. i veered left,
toward my truck. something caught my jacket,
yanking me back.

"where do you think you're going?" he asked,
outraged. he was gripping a fistful of my jacket in one
hand.

i was confused. "i'm going home."

"didn't you hear me promise to take you safely home?
do you think i'm going to let you drive in your
condition?" his voice was still indignant.

"what condition? and what about my truck?" i
complained.

"i'll have alice drop it off after school." he was towing
me toward his car now, pulling me by my jacket. it
was all i could do to keep from falling backward. he'd
probably just drag me along anyway if i did.

"let go!" i insisted. he ignored me. i staggered along
sideways across the wet sidewalk until we reached
the volvo. then he finally freed me - i stumbled
against the passenger door.

"you are so pushy!" i grumbled.

"it's open," was all he responded. he got in the
driver's side.

"i am perfectly capable of driving myself home!" i
stood by the car, fuming. it was raining harder now,
and i'd never put my hood up, so my hair was
dripping down my back.

111 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he lowered the automatic window and leaned toward
me across the seat.

"get in, bella."

i didn't answer. i was mentally calculating my
chances of reaching the truck before he could catch
me. i had to admit, they weren't good.

"i'll just drag you back," he threatened, guessing my
plan. i tried to maintain what dignity i could as i got
into his car. i wasn't very successful - i looked like a
half-drowned cat and my boots squeaked.

"this is completely unnecessary," i said stiffly. he
didn't answer. he fiddled with the controls, turning
the heater up and the music down. as he pulled out
of the parking lot, i was preparing to give him the
silent treatment - my face in full pout mode - but
then i recognized the music playing, and my curiosity
got the better of my intentions.

"clair de lune?" i asked, surprised.

"you know debussy?" he sounded surprised, too.

"not well," i admitted. "my mother plays a lot of
classical music around the house - i only know my
favorites."

"it's one of my favorites, too." he stared out through
the rain, lost in thought.

i listened to the music, relaxing against the light gray
leather seat. it was impossible not to respond to the
familiar, soothing melody. the rain blurred everything
outside the window into gray and green smudges. i
112 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
began to realize we were driving very fast; the car
moved so steadily, so evenly, though, i didn't feel the
speed. only the town flashing by gave it away.

"what is your mother like?" he asked me suddenly. i
glanced over to see him studying me with curious
eyes.

"she looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," i said. he
raised his eyebrows. "i have too much charlie in me.
she's more outgoing than i am, and braver. she's
irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a very
unpredictable cook. she's my best friend." i stopped.
talking about her was making me depressed.

"how old are you, bella?" his voice sounded
frustrated for some reason i couldn't imagine. he'd
stopped the car, and i realized we were at charlie's
house already. the rain was so heavy that i could
barely see the house at all. it was like the car was
submerged under a river.

"i'm seventeen," i responded, a little confused.

"you don't seem seventeen."

his tone was reproachful; it made me laugh.

"what?" he asked, curious again.

"my mom always says i was born thirty-five years old
and that i get more middle-aged every year." i
laughed, and then sighed. "well, someone has to be
the adult." i paused for a second. "you don't seem
much like a junior in high school yourself," i noted.

he made a face and changed the subject.
113 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"so why did your mother marry phil?"

i was surprised he would remember the name; i'd
mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. it
took me a moment to answer.

"my mother she's very young for her age. i think
phil makes her feel even younger. at any rate, she's
crazy about him." i shook my head. the attraction
was a mystery to me.

"do you approve?" he asked.

"does it matter?" i countered. "i want her to be
happy and he is who she wants."

"that's very generous i wonder," he mused.

"what?"

"would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you
think? no matter who your choice was?" he was
suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine.

"i-i think so," i stuttered. "but she's the parent, after
all. it's a little bit different."

"no one too scary then," he teased.

i grinned in response. "what do you mean by scary?
multiple facial piercings and extensive tattoos?"

"that's one definition, i suppose."

"what's your definition?"

but he ignored my question and asked me another.
"do you think that i could be scary?" he raised one

114 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
eyebrow, and the faint trace of a smile lightened his
face.

i thought for a moment, wondering whether the truth
or a lie would go over better. i decided to go with the
truth. "hmmm i think you could be, if you wanted
to."

"are you frightened of me now?" the smile vanished,
and his heavenly face was suddenly serious.

"no." but i answered too quickly. the smile returned.

"so, now are you going to tell me about your family?" i
asked to distract him. "it's got to be a much more
interesting story than mine." he was instantly
cautious. "what do you want to know?"

"the cullens adopted you?" i verified.

"yes."

i hesitated for a moment. "what happened to your
parents?"

"they died many years ago." his tone was matter-of-
fact.

"i'm sorry," i mumbled.

"i don't really remember them that clearly. carlisle
and esme have been my parents for a long time now."

"and you love them." it wasn't a question. it was
obvious in the way he spoke of them.

"yes." he smiled. "i couldn't imagine two better
people."

115 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you're very lucky."

"i know i am."

"and your brother and sister?"

he glanced at the clock on the dashboard.

"my brother and sister, and jasper and rosalie for
that matter, are going to be quite upset if they have to
stand in the rain waiting for me."

"oh, sorry, i guess you have to go." i didn't want to
get out of the car.

"and you probably want your truck back before chief
swan gets home, so you don't have to tell him about
the biology incident." he grinned at me.

"i'm sure he's already heard. there are no secrets in
forks." i sighed. he laughed, and there was an edge
to his laughter.

"have fun at the beach good weather for
sunbathing." he glanced out at the sheeting rain.

"won't i see you tomorrow?"

"no. emmett and i are starting the weekend early."

"what are you going to do?" a friend could ask that,
right? i hoped the disappointment wasn't too
apparent in my voice.

"we're going to be hiking in the goat rocks
wilderness, just south of rainier."

i remembered charlie had said the cullens went
camping frequently.
116 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh, well, have fun." i tried to sound enthusiastic. i
don't think i fooled him, though. a smile was playing
around the edges of his lips.

"will you do something for me this weekend?" he
turned to look me straight in the face, utilizing the
full power of his burning gold eyes. i nodded
helplessly.

"don't be offended, but you seem to be one of those
people who just attract accidents like a magnet. so
try not to fall into the ocean or get run over or
anything, all right?" he smiled crookedly. the
helplessness had faded as he spoke. i glared at him.

"i'll see what i can do," i snapped as i jumped out into
the rain. i slammed the door behind me with
excessive force.

he was still smiling as he drove away.

117 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 scary stories

as i sat in my room, trying to concentrate on the third
act of macbeth, i was really listening for my truck. i
would have thought, even over the pounding rain, i
could have heard the engine's roar. but when i went
to peek out the curtain - again - it was suddenly
there.

i wasn't looking forward to friday, and it more than
lived up to my non-expectations. of course there were
the fainting comments. jessica especially seemed to
get a kick out of that story. luckily mike had kept his
mouth shut, and no one seemed to know about
edward's involvement. she did have a lot of questions
about lunch, though.

"so what did edward cullen want yesterday?" jessica
asked in trig.

"i don't know," i answered truthfully. "he never really
got to the point."

"you looked kind of mad," she fished.

"did i?" i kept my expression blank.

"you know, i've never seen him sit with anyone but
his family before. that was weird."

"weird," i agreed. she seemed annoyed; she flipped
her dark curls impatiently - i guessed she'd been
hoping to hear something that would make a good
story for her to pass on.
118 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the worst part about friday was that, even though i
knew he wasn't going to be there, i still hoped. when i
walked into the cafeteria with jessica and mike, i
couldn't keep from looking at his table, where rosalie,
alice, and jasper sat talking, heads close together.
and i couldn't stop the gloom that engulfed me as i
realized i didn't know how long i would have to wait
before i saw him again.

at my usual table, everyone was full of our plans for
the next day. mike was animated again, putting a
great deal of trust in the local weatherman who
promised sun tomorrow. i'd have to see that before i
believed it. but it was warmer today - almost sixty.
maybe the outing wouldn't be completely miserable.

i intercepted a few unfriendly glances from lauren
during lunch, which i didn't understand until we were
all walking out of the room together. i was right
behind her, just a foot from her slick, silver blond
hair, and she was evidently unaware of that.

"don't know why bella" - she sneered my name -
"doesn't just sit with the cullens from now on."

i heard her muttering to mike. i'd never noticed what
an unpleasant, nasal voice she had, and i was
surprised by the malice in it. i really didn't know her
well at all, certainly not well enough for her to dislike
me - or so i'd thought. "she's my friend; she sits
with us," mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit
territorially. i paused to let jess and angela pass me.
i didn't want to hear any more.

that night at dinner, charlie seemed enthusiastic
about my trip to la push in the morning. i think he
119 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
felt guilty for leaving me home alone on the weekends,
but he'd spent too many years building his habits to
break them now. of course he knew the names of all
the kids going, and their parents, and their great-
grandparents, too, probably. he seemed to approve. i
wondered if he would approve of my plan to ride to
seattle with edward cullen. not that i was going to
tell him.

"dad, do you know a place called goat rocks or
something like that? i think it's south of mount
rainier," i asked casually.

"yeah - why?"

i shrugged. "some kids were talking about camping
there."

"it's not a very good place for camping." he sounded
surprised. "too many bears. most people go there
during the hunting season."

"oh," i murmured. "maybe i got the name wrong." i
meant to sleep in, but an unusual brightness woke
me. i opened my eyes to see a clear yellow light
streaming through my window. i couldn't believe it. i
hurried to the window to check, and sure enough,
there was the sun. it was in the wrong place in the
sky, too low, and it didn't seem to be as close as it
should be, but it was definitely the sun. clouds
ringed the horizon, but a large patch of blue was
visible in the middle. i lingered by the window as long
as i could, afraid that if i left the blue would
disappear again.

120 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the newtons' olympic outfitters store was just north
of town. i'd seen the store, but i'd never stopped there
- not having much need for any supplies required for
being outdoors over an extended period of time. in the
parking lot i recognized mike's suburban and tyler's
sentra. as i pulled up next to their vehicles, i could
see the group standing around in front of the
suburban. eric was there, along with two other boys i
had class with; i was fairly sure their names were ben
and conner. jess was there, flanked by angela and
lauren. three other girls stood with them, including
one i remembered falling over in gym on friday. that
one gave me a dirty look as i got out of the truck, and
whispered something to lauren. lauren shook out
her cornsilk hair and eyed me scornfully. so it was
going to be one of those days.

at least mike was happy to see me.

"you came!" he called, delighted. "and i said it would
be sunny today, didn't i?"

"i told you i was coming," i reminded him.

"we're just waiting for lee and samantha unless
you invited someone," mike added.

"nope," i lied lightly, hoping i wouldn't get caught in
the lie. but also wishing that a miracle would occur,
and edward would appear. mike looked satisfied.

"will you ride in my car? it's that or lee's mom's
minivan."

"sure."

121 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he smiled blissfully. it was so easy to make mike
happy.

"you can have shotgun," he promised. i hid my
chagrin. it wasn't as simple to make mike and jessica
happy at the same time. i could see jessica glowering
at us now.

the numbers worked out in my favor, though. lee
brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat
was necessary. i managed to wedge jess in between
mike and me in the front seat of the suburban. mike
could have been more graceful about it, but at least
jess seemed appeased.

it was only fifteen miles to la push from forks, with
gorgeous, dense green forests edging the road most of
the way and the wide quillayute river snaking
beneath it twice. i was glad i had the window seat.
we'd rolled the windows down - the suburban was a
bit claustrophobic with nine people in it - and i tried
to absorb as much sunlight as possible. i'd been to
the beaches around la push many times during my
forks summers with charlie, so the mile-long
crescent of first beach was familiar to me. it was still
breathtaking. the water was dark gray, even in the
sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky
shore. islands rose out of the steel harbor waters with
sheer cliff sides, reaching to uneven summits, and
crowned with austere, soaring firs. the beach had
only a thin border of actual sand at the water's edge,
after which it grew into millions of large, smooth
stones that looked uniformly gray from a distance,
but close up were every shade a stone could be: terra-
cotta, sea green, lavender, blue gray, dull gold. the
122 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
tide line was strewn with huge driftwood trees,
bleached bone white in the salt waves, some piled
together against the edge of the forest fringe, some
lying solitary, just out of reach of the waves.

there was a brisk wind coming off the waves, cool
and briny. pelicans floated on the swells while
seagulls and a lone eagle wheeled above them. the
clouds still circled the sky, threatening to invade at
any moment, but for now the sun shone bravely in its
halo of blue sky. we picked our way down to the
beach, mike leading the way to a ring of driftwood
logs that had obviously been used for parties like ours
before. there was a fire circle already in place, filled
with black ashes. eric and the boy i thought was
named ben gathered broken branches of driftwood
from the drier piles against the forest edge, and soon
had a teepee-shaped construction built atop the old
cinders.

"have you ever seen a driftwood fire?" mike asked me.
i was sitting on one of the bone-colored benches; the
other girls clustered, gossiping excitedly, on either
side of me. mike kneeled by the fire, lighting one of
the smaller sticks with a cigarette lighter.

"no," i said as he placed the blazing twig carefully
against the teepee.

"you'll like this then - watch the colors." he lit
another small branch and laid it alongside the first.
the flames started to lick quickly up the dry wood.

"it's blue," i said in surprise.

123 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"the salt does it. pretty, isn't it?" he lit one more
piece, placed it where the fire hadn't yet caught, and
then came to sit by me. thankfully, jess was on his
other side. she turned to him and claimed his
attention. i watched the strange blue and green
flames crackle toward the sky. after a half hour of
chatter, some of the boys wanted to hike to the
nearby tidal pools. it was a dilemma. on the one
hand, i loved the tide pools. they had fascinated me
since i was a child; they were one of the only things i
ever looked forward to when i had to come to forks.
on the other hand, i'd also fallen into them a lot. not
a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. it
reminded me of edward's request - that i not fall
into the ocean.

lauren was the one who made my decision for me.
she didn't want to hike, and she was definitely
wearing the wrong shoes for it. most of the other girls
besides angela and jessica decided to stay on the
beach as well. i waited until tyler and eric had
committed to remaining with them before i got up
quietly to join the pro-hiking group. mike gave me a
huge smile when he saw that i was coming.

the hike wasn't too long, though i hated to lose the
sky in the woods. the green light of the forest was
strangely at odds with the adolescent laughter, too
murky and ominous to be in harmony with the light
banter around me. i had to watch each step i took
very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches
above, and i soon fell behind. eventually i broke
through the emerald confines of the forest and found
the rocky shore again. it was low tide, and a tidal

124 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
river flowed past us on its way to the sea. along its
pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely
drained were teeming with life.

i was very cautious not to lean too far over the little
ocean ponds. the others were fearless, leaping over
the rocks, perching precariously on the edges. i found
a very stable-looking rock on the fringe of one of the
largest pools and sat there cautiously, spellbound by
the natural aquarium below me. the bouquets of
brilliant anemones undulated ceaselessly in the
invisible current, twisted shells scurried about the
edges, obscuring the crabs within them, starfish
stuck motionless to the rocks and each other, while
one small black eel with white racing stripes wove
through the bright green weeds, waiting for the sea to
return. i was completely absorbed, except for one
small part of my mind that wondered what edward
was doing now, and trying to imagine what he would
be saying if he were here with me.

finally the boys were hungry, and i got up stiffly to
follow them back. i tried to keep up better this time
through the woods, so naturally i fell a few times. i
got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the knees
of my jeans were stained green, but it could have
been worse.

when we got back to first beach, the group we'd left
behind had multiplied. as we got closer we could see
the shining, straight black hair and copper skin of the
newcomers, teenagers from the reservation come to
socialize.

125 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the food was already being passed around, and the
boys hurried to claim a share while eric introduced
us as we each entered the driftwood circle. angela
and i were the last to arrive, and, as eric said our
names, i noticed a younger boy sitting on the stones
near the fire glance up at me in interest. i sat down
next to angela, and mike brought us sandwiches and
an array of sodas to choose from, while a boy who
looked to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the
names of the seven others with him. all i caught was
that one of the girls was also named jessica, and the
boy who noticed me was named jacob.

it was relaxing to sit with angela; she was a restful
kind of person to be around - she didn't feel the
need to fill every silence with chatter. she left me free
to think undisturbed while we ate. and i was thinking
about how disjointedly time seemed to flow in forks,
passing in a blur at times, with single images
standing out more clearly than others. and then, at
other times, every second was significant, etched in
my mind. i knew exactly what caused the difference,
and it disturbed me. during lunch the clouds started
to advance, slinking across the blue sky, darting in
front of the sun momentarily, casting long shadows
across the beach, and blackening the waves. as they
finished eating, people started to drift away in twos
and threes. some walked down to the edge of the
waves, trying to skip rocks across the choppy surface.
others were gathering a second expedition to the tide
pools. mike - with jessica shadowing him - headed
up to the one shop in the village. some of the local
kids went with them; others went along on the hike.
by the time they all had scattered, i was sitting alone
126 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
on my driftwood log, with lauren and tyler occupying
themselves by the cd player someone had thought to
bring, and three teenagers from the reservation
perched around the circle, including the boy named
jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as
spokesperson.

a few minutes after angela left with the hikers, jacob
sauntered over to take her place by my side. he
looked fourteen, maybe fifteen, and had long, glossy
black hair pulled back with a rubber band at the
nape of his neck. his skin was beautiful, silky and
russet-colored; his eyes were dark, set deep above the
high planes of his cheekbones. he still had just a hint
of childish roundness left around his chin. altogether,
a very pretty face. however, my positive opinion of his
looks was damaged by the first words out of his
mouth.

"you're isabella swan, aren't you?"

it was like the first day of school all over again.

"bella," i sighed.

"i'm jacob black." he held his hand out in a friendly
gesture. "you bought my dad's truck."

"oh," i said, relieved, shaking his sleek hand. "you're
billy's son. i probably should remember you."

"no, i'm the youngest of the family - you would
remember my older sisters."

"rachel and rebecca," i suddenly recalled. charlie
and billy had thrown us together a lot during my
visits, to keep us busy while they fished. we were all
127 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
too shy to make much progress as friends. of course,
i'd kicked up enough tantrums to end the fishing
trips by the time i was eleven.

"are they here?" i examined the girls at the ocean's
edge, wondering if i would recognize them now.

"no." jacob shook his head. "rachel got a scholarship
to washington state, and rebecca married a samoan
surfer - she lives in hawaii now."

"married. wow." i was stunned. the twins were only a
little over a year older than i was.

"so how do you like the truck?" he asked.

"i love it. it runs great."

"yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "i was so
relived when charlie bought it. my dad wouldn't let
me work on building another car when we had a
perfectly good vehicle right there."

"it's not that slow," i objected.

"have you tried to go over sixty?"

"no," i admitted.

"good. don't." he grinned.

i couldn't help grinning back. "it does great in a
collision," i offered in my truck's defense.

"i don't think a tank could take out that old monster,"
he agreed with another laugh.

"so you build cars?" i asked, impressed.

128 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"when i have free time, and parts. you wouldn't
happen to know where i could get my hands on a
master cylinder for a 1986 volkswagen rabbit?" he
added jokingly. he had a pleasant, husky voice.

"sorry," i laughed, "i haven't seen any lately, but i'll
keep my eyes open for you." as if i knew what that
was. he was very easy to talk with. he flashed a
brilliant smile, looking at me appreciatively in a way i
was learning to recognize. i wasn't the only one who
noticed.

"you know bella, jacob?" lauren asked - in what i
imagined was an insolent tone - from across the fire.

"we've sort of known each other since i was born," he
laughed, smiling at me again.

"how nice." she didn't sound like she thought it was
nice at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed.

"bella," she called again, watching my face carefully,
"i was just saying to tyler that it was too bad none of
the cullens could come out today. didn't anyone
think to invite them?" her expression of concern was
unconvincing.

"you mean dr. carlisle cullen's family?" the tall, older
boy asked before i could respond, much to lauren's
irritation. he was really closer to a man than a boy,
and his voice was very deep.

"yes, do you know them?" she asked condescendingly,
turning halfway toward him.

"the cullens don't come here," he said in a tone that
closed the subject, ignoring her question.
129 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
tyler, trying to win back her attention, asked
lauren's opinion on a cd

he held. she was distracted.

i stared at the deep-voiced boy, taken aback, but he
was looking away toward the dark forest behind us.
he'd said that the cullens didn't come here, but his
tone had implied something more - that they weren't
allowed; they were prohibited. his manner left a
strange impression on me, and i tried to ignore it
without success.

jacob interrupted my meditation. "so is forks driving
you insane yet?"

"oh, i'd say that's an understatement." i grimaced. he
grinned understandingly.

i was still turning over the brief comment on the
cullens, and i had a sudden inspiration. it was a
stupid plan, but i didn't have any better ideas. i
hoped that young jacob was as yet inexperienced
around girls, so that he wouldn't see through my
sure-to-be-pitiful attempts at flirting.

"do you want to walk down the beach with me?" i
asked, trying to imitate that way edward had of
looking up from underneath his eyelashes. it couldn't
have nearly the same effect, i was sure, but jacob
jumped up willingly enough.

as we walked north across the multihued stones
toward the driftwood seawall, the clouds finally closed
ranks across the sky, causing the sea to darken and

130 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the temperature to drop. i shoved my hands deep into
the pockets of my jacket.

"so you're, what, sixteen?" i asked, trying not to look
like an idiot as i fluttered my eyelids the way i'd seen
girls do on tv.

"i just turned fifteen," he confessed, flattered.

"really?" my face was full of false surprise. "i would
have thought you were older."

"i'm tall for my age," he explained.

"do you come up to forks much?" i asked archly, as
if i was hoping for a yes. i sounded idiotic to myself. i
was afraid he would turn on me with disgust and
accuse me of my fraud, but he still seemed flattered.

"not too much," he admitted with a frown. "but when
i get my car finished i can go up as much as i want -
after i get my license," he amended.

"who was that other boy lauren was talking to? he
seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." i
purposefully lumped myself in with the youngsters,
trying to make it clear that i preferred jacob.

"that's sam - he's nineteen," he informed me.

"what was that he was saying about the doctor's
family?" i asked innocently.

"the cullens? oh, they're not supposed to come onto
the reservation." he looked away, out toward james
island, as he confirmed what i'd thought i'd heard in
sam's voice.

131 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why not?"

he glanced back at me, biting his lip. "oops. i'm not
supposed to say anything about that."

"oh, i won't tell anyone, i'm just curious." i tried to
make my smile alluring, wondering if i was laying it
on too thick.

he smiled back, though, looking allured. then he
lifted one eyebrow and his voice was even huskier
than before.

"do you like scary stories?" he asked ominously.

"i love them," i enthused, making an effort to smolder
at him. jacob strolled to a nearby driftwood tree that
had its roots sticking out like the attenuated legs of a
huge, pale spider. he perched lightly on one of the
twisted roots while i sat beneath him on the body of
the tree. he stared down at the rocks, a smile
hovering around the edges of his broad lips. i could
see he was going to try to make this good. i focused
on keeping the vital interest i felt out of my eyes.

"do you know any of our old stories, about where we
came from - the quileutes, i mean?" he began.

"not really," i admitted.

"well, there are lots of legends, some of them claiming
to date back to the flood - supposedly, the ancient
quileutes tied their canoes to the tops of the tallest
trees on the mountain to survive like noah and the
ark." he smiled, to show me how little stock he put in
the histories.

132 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"another legend claims that we descended from
wolves - and that the wolves are our brothers still.
it's against tribal law to kill them.

"then there are the stories about the cold ones." his
voice dropped a little lower.

"the cold ones?" i asked, not faking my intrigue now.

"yes. there are stories of the cold ones as old as the
wolf legends, and some much more recent. according
to legend, my own great-grandfather knew some of
them. he was the one who made the treaty that kept
them off our land." he rolled his eyes.

"your great-grandfather?" i encouraged.

"he was a tribal elder, like my father. you see, the
cold ones are the natural enemies of the wolf-well,
not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into
men, like our ancestors. you would call them
werewolves."

"werewolves have enemies?"

"only one."

i stared at him earnestly, hoping to disguise my
impatience as admiration.

"so you see," jacob continued, "the cold ones are
traditionally our enemies. but this pack that came to
our territory during my great-grandfather's time was
different. they didn't hunt the way others of their
kind did - they weren't supposed to be dangerous to
the tribe. so my great-grandfather made a truce with
them. if they would promise to stay off our lands, we

133 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
wouldn't expose them to the pale-faces." he winked at
me.

"if they weren't dangerous, then why ?" i tried to
understand, struggling not to let him see how
seriously i was considering his ghost story.

"there's always a risk for humans to be around the
cold ones, even if they're civilized like this clan was.
you never know when they might get too hungry to
resist." he deliberately worked a thick edge of menace
into his tone.

"what do you mean, 'civilized'?"

"they claimed that they didn't hunt humans. they
supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals
instead."

i tried to keep my voice casual. "so how does it fit in
with the cullens?

are they like the cold ones your greatgrandfather
met?"

"no." he paused dramatically. "they are the same
ones." he must have thought the expression on my
face was fear inspired by his story. he smiled,
pleased, and continued.

"there are more of them now, a new female and a new
male, but the rest are the same. in my great-
grandfather's time they already knew of the leader,
carlisle. he'd been here and gone before your people
had even arrived." he was fighting a smile.

134 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and what are they?" i finally asked. "what are the
cold ones?" he smiled darkly.

"blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "your
people call them vampires."

i stared out at the rough surf after he answered, not
sure what my face was exposing.

"you have goose bumps," he laughed delightedly.

"you're a good storyteller," i complimented him, still
staring into the waves.

"pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? no wonder my dad
doesn't want us to talk about it to anyone."

i couldn't control my expression enough to look at
him yet. "don't worry, i won't give you away."

"i guess i just violated the treaty," he laughed.

"i'll take it to the grave," i promised, and then i
shivered.

"seriously, though, don't say anything to charlie. he
was pretty mad at my dad when he heard that some
of us weren't going to the hospital since dr. cullen
started working there."

"i won't, of course not."

"so do you think we're a bunch of superstitious
natives or what?" he asked in a playful tone, but with
a hint of worry. i still hadn't looked away from the
ocean.

i turned and smiled at him as normally as i could.

135 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no. i think you're very good at telling scary stories,
though. i still have goose bumps, see?" i held up my
arm.

"cool." he smiled.

and then the sound of the beach rocks clattering
against each other warned us that someone was
approaching. our heads snapped up at the same time
to see mike and jessica about fifty yards away,
walking toward us.

"there you are, bella," mike called in relief, waving his
arm over his head.

"is that your boyfriend?" jacob asked, alerted by the
jealous edge in mike's voice. i was surprised it was so
obvious.

"no, definitely not," i whispered. i was tremendously
grateful to jacob, and eager to make him as happy as
possible. i winked at him, carefully turning away from
mike to do so. he smiled, elated by my inept flirting.

"so when i get my license" he began.

"you should come see me in forks. we could hang
out sometime." i felt guilty as i said this, knowing that
i'd used him. but i really did like jacob. he was
someone i could easily be friends with.

mike had reached us now, with jessica still a few
paces back. i could see his eyes appraising jacob,
and looking satisfied at his obvious youth.

"where have you been?" he asked, though the answer
was right in front of him.
136 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"jacob was just telling me some local stories," i
volunteered. "it was really interesting."

i smiled at jacob warmly, and he grinned back.

"well," mike paused, carefully reassessing the
situation as he watched our camaraderie. "we're
packing up - it looks like it's going to rain soon."

we all looked up at the glowering sky. it certainly did
look like rain.

"okay." i jumped up. "i'm coming."

"it was nice to see you again," jacob said, and i could
tell he was taunting mike just a bit.

"it really was. next time charlie comes down to see
billy, i'll come, too," i promised.

his grin stretched across his face. "that would be
cool."

"and thanks," i added earnestly.

i pulled up my hood as we tramped across the rocks
toward the parking lot. a few drops were beginning to
fall, making black spots on the stones where they
landed. when we got to the suburban the others were
already loading everything back in. i crawled into the
backseat by angela and tyler, announcing that i'd
already had my turn in the shotgun position. angela
just stared out the window at the escalating storm,
and lauren twisted around in the middle seat to
occupy tyler's attention, so i could simply lay my
head back on the seat and close my eyes and try very
hard not to think.
137 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 nightmare

i told charlie i had a lot of homework to do, and that i
didn't want anything to eat. there was a basketball
game on that he was excited about, though of course i
had no idea what was special about it, so he wasn't
aware of anything unusual in my face or tone.

once in my room, i locked the door. i dug through my
desk until i found my old headphones, and i plugged
them into my little cd player. i picked up a cd that
phil had given to me for christmas. it was one of his
favorite bands, but they used a little too much bass
and shrieking for my tastes. i popped it into place and
lay down on my bed. i put on the headphones, hit
play, and turned up the volume until it hurt my ears.
i closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so i
added a pillow over the top half of my face.

i concentrated very carefully on the music, trying to
understand the lyrics, to unravel the complicated
drum patterns. by the third time i'd listened through
the cd, i knew all the words to the choruses, at least.
i was surprised to find that i really did like the band
after all, once i got past the blaring noise. i'd have to
thank phil again. and it worked. the shattering beats
made it impossible for me to think -

which was the whole purpose of the exercise. i
listened to the cd again and again, until i was
singing along with all the songs, until, finally, i fell
asleep.

138 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i opened my eyes to a familiar place. aware in some
corner of my consciousness that i was dreaming, i
recognized the green light of the forest. i could hear
the waves crashing against the rocks somewhere
nearby. and i knew that if i found the ocean, i'd be
able to see the sun. i was trying to follow the sound,
but then jacob black was there, tugging on my hand,
pulling me back toward the blackest part of the
forest.

"jacob? what's wrong?" i asked. his face was
frightened as he yanked with all his strength against
my resistance; i didn't want to go into the dark.

"run, bella, you have to run!" he whispered, terrified.

"this way, bella!" i recognized mike's voice calling out
of the gloomy heart of the trees, but i couldn't see
him.

"why?" i asked, still pulling against jacob's grasp,
desperate now to find the sun.

but jacob let go of my hand and yelped, suddenly
shaking, falling to the dim forest floor. he twitched on
the ground as i watched in horror.

"jacob!" i screamed. but he was gone. in his place
was a large red-brown wolf with black eyes. the wolf
faced away from me, pointing toward the shore, the
hair on the back of his shoulders bristling, low growls
issuing from between his exposed fangs.

"bella, run!" mike cried out again from behind me.
but i didn't turn. i was watching a light coming
toward me from the beach.

139 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and then edward stepped out from the trees, his skin
faintly glowing, his eyes black and dangerous. he
held up one hand and beckoned me to come to him.
the wolf growled at my feet.

i took a step forward, toward edward. he smiled then,
and his teeth were sharp, pointed.

"trust me," he purred.

i took another step.

the wolf launched himself across the space between
me and the vampire, fangs aiming for the jugular.

"no!" i screamed, wrenching upright out of my bed.
my sudden movement caused the headphones to pull
the cd player off the bedside table, and it clattered to
the wooden floor.

my light was still on, and i was sitting fully dressed
on the bed, with my shoes on. i glanced, disoriented,
at the clock on my dresser. it was five-thirty in the
morning.

i groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my face,
kicking off my boots. i was too uncomfortable to get
anywhere near sleep, though. i rolled back over and
unbuttoned my jeans, yanking them off awkwardly as
i tried to stay horizontal. i could feel the braid in my
hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of my
skull. i turned onto my side and ripped the rubber
band out, quickly combing through the plaits with my
fingers. i pulled the pillow back over my eyes.

it was all no use, of course. my subconscious had
dredged up exactly the images i'd been trying so
140 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
desperately to avoid. i was going to have to face them
now.

i sat up, and my head spun for a minute as the blood
flowed downward. first things first, i thought to
myself, happy to put it off as long as possible. i
grabbed my bathroom bag.

the shower didn't last nearly as long as i hoped it
would, though. even taking the time to blow-dry my
hair, i was soon out of things to do in the bathroom.
wrapped in a towel, i crossed back to my room. i
couldn't tell if charlie was still asleep, or if he had
already left. i went to look out my window, and the
cruiser was gone. fishing again. i dressed slowly in
my most comfy sweats and then made my bed -
something i never did. i couldn't put it off any longer.
i went to my desk and switched on my old computer.

i hated using the internet here. my modem was sadly
outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing up
took so long that i decided to go get myself a bowl of
cereal while i waited.

i ate slowly, chewing each bite with care. when i was
done, i washed the bowl and spoon, dried them, and
put them away. my feet dragged as i climbed the
stairs. i went to my cd player first, picking it up off
the floor and placing it precisely in the center of the
table. i pulled out the headphones, and put them
away in the desk drawer. then i turned the same cd
on, turning it down to the point where it was
background noise. with another sigh, i turned to my
computer. naturally, the screen was covered in pop-
up ads. i sat in my hard folding chair and began

141 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
closing all the little windows. eventually i made it to
my favorite search engine. i shot down a few more
pop-ups and then typed in one word. vampire.

it took an infuriatingly long time, of course. when the
results came up, there was a lot to sift through -
everything from movies and tv shows to role-playing
games, underground metal, and gothic cosmetic
companies. then i found a promising site - vampires
a-z. i waited impatiently for it to load, quickly
clicking closed each ad that flashed across the screen.
finally the screen was finished - simple white
background with black text, academic-looking. two
quotes greeted me on the home page: throughout the
vast shadowy world of ghosts and demons there is no
figure so terrible, no figure so dreaded and abhorred,
yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the
vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but
yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the
mysterious and terrible qualities of both. - rev.
montague summers

if there is in this world a well-attested account, it is
that of the vampires. nothing is lacking: official
reports, affidavits of well-known people, of surgeons,
of priests, of magistrates; the judicial proof is most
complete. and with all that, who is there who believes
in vampires?

- rousseau

the rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all
the different myths of vampires held throughout the
world. the first i clicked on, the danag, was a filipino
vampire supposedly responsible for planting taro on

142 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the islands long ago. the myth continued that the
danag worked with humans for many years, but the
partnership ended one day when a woman cut her
finger and a danag sucked her wound, enjoying the
taste so much that it drained her body completely of
blood.

i read carefully through the descriptions, looking for
anything that sounded familiar, let alone plausible. it
seemed that most vampire myths centered around
beautiful women as demons and children as victims;
they also seemed like constructs created to explain
away the high mortality rates for young children, and
to give men an excuse for infidelity. many of the
stories involved bodiless spirits and warnings against
improper burials. there wasn't much that sounded
like the movies i'd seen, and only a very few, like the
hebrew estrie and the polish upier, who were even
preoccupied with drinking blood.

only three entries really caught my attention: the
romanian varacolaci, a powerful undead being who
could appear as a beautiful, pale-skinned human, the
slovak nelapsi, a creature so strong and fast it could
massacre an entire village in the single hour after
midnight, and one other, the stregoni benefici.

about this last there was only one brief sentence.

stregoni benefici: an italian vampire, said to be on
the side of goodness, and a mortal enemy of all evil
vampires.

it was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth
among hundreds that claimed the existence of good
vampires.
143 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
overall, though, there was little that coincided with
jacob's stories or my own observations. i'd made a
little catalogue in my mind as i'd read and carefully
compared it with each myth. speed, strength, beauty,
pale skin, eyes that shift color; and then jacob's
criteria: blood drinkers, enemies of the werewolf, cold-
skinned, and immortal. there were very few myths
that matched even one factor.

and then another problem, one that i'd remembered
from the small number of scary movies that i'd seen
and was backed up by today's reading -

vampires couldn't come out in the daytime, the sun
would burn them to a cinder. they slept in coffins all
day and came out only at night. aggravated, i
snapped off the computer's main power switch, not
waiting to shut things down properly. through my
irritation, i felt overwhelming embarrassment. it was
all so stupid. i was sitting in my room, researching
vampires. what was wrong with me? i decided that
most of the blame belonged on the doorstep of the
town of forks - and the entire sodden olympic
peninsula, for that matter.

i had to get out of the house, but there was nowhere i
wanted to go that didn't involve a three-day drive. i
pulled on my boots anyway, unclear where i was
headed, and went downstairs. i shrugged into my
raincoat without checking the weather and stomped
out the door.

it was overcast, but not raining yet. i ignored my
truck and started east on foot, angling across
charlie's yard toward the ever-encroaching forest. it

144 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
didn't take long till i was deep enough for the house
and the road to be invisible, for the only sound to be
the squish of the damp earth under my feet and the
sudden cries of the jays.

there was a thin ribbon of a trail that led through the
forest here, or i wouldn't risk wandering on my own
like this. my sense of direction was hopeless; i could
get lost in much less helpful surroundings. the trail
wound deeper and deeper into the forest, mostly east
as far as i could tell. it snaked around the sitka
spruces and the hemlocks, the yews and the maples. i
only vaguely knew the names of the trees around me,
and all i knew was due to charlie pointing them out
to me from the cruiser window in earlier days. there
were many i didn't know, and others i couldn't be
sure about because they were so covered in green
parasites. i followed the trail as long as my anger at
myself pushed me forward. as that started to ebb, i
slowed. a few drops of moisture trickled down from
the canopy above me, but i couldn't be certain if it
was beginning to rain or if it was simply pools left
over from yesterday, held high in the leaves above me,
slowly dripping their way back to the earth. a recently
fallen tree - i knew it was recent because it wasn't
entirely carpeted in moss - rested against the trunk
of one of her sisters, creating a sheltered little bench
just a few safe feet off the trail. i stepped over the
ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was
between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they
touched, and leaned my hooded head back against
the living tree.

145 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
this was the wrong place to have come. i should have
known, but where else was there to go? the forest
was deep green and far too much like the scene in
last night's dream to allow for peace of mind. now
that there was no longer the sound of my soggy
footsteps, the silence was piercing. the birds were
quiet, too, the drops increasing in frequency, so it
must be raining above. the ferns stood higher than
my head, now that i was seated, and i knew someone
could walk by on the path, three feet away, and not
see me.

here in the trees it was much easier to believe the
absurdities that embarrassed me indoors. nothing
had changed in this forest for thousands of years, and
all the myths and legends of a hundred different
lands seemed much more likely in this green haze
than they had in my clear-cut bedroom.

i forced myself to focus on the two most vital
questions i had to answer, but i did so unwillingly.

first, i had to decide if it was possible that what
jacob had said about the cullens could be true.

immediately my mind responded with a resounding
negative. it was silly and morbid to entertain such
ridiculous notions. but what, then? i asked myself.
there was no rational explanation for how i was alive
at this moment. i listed again in my head the things
i'd observed myself: the impossible speed and
strength, the eye color shifting from black to gold and
back again, the inhuman beauty, the pale, frigid skin.
and more -

146 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
small things that registered slowly - how they never
seemed to eat, the disturbing grace with which they
moved. and the way be

sometimes spoke, with unfamiliar cadences and
phrases that better fit the style of a turn-of-the-
century novel than that of a twenty-first-century
classroom. he had skipped class the day we'd done
blood typing. he hadn't said no to the beach trip till
he heard where we were going. he seemed to know
what everyone around him was thinking except me.
he had told me he was the villain, dangerous

could the cullens be vampires?

well, they were something. something outside the
possibility of rational justification was taking place in
front of my incredulous eyes. whether it be jacob's
cold ones or my own superhero theory, edward
cullen was not human. he was something more.

so then - maybe. that would have to be my answer
for now. and then the most important question of all.
what was i going to do if it was true?

if edward was a vampire - i could hardly make
myself think the words -

then what should i do? involving someone else was
definitely out. i couldn't even believe myself; anyone i
told would have me committed. only two options
seemed practical. the first was to take his advice: to
be smart, to avoid him as much as possible. to cancel
our plans, to go back to ignoring him as far as i was
able. to pretend there was an impenetrably thick
glass wall between us in the one class where we were
147 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
forced together. to tell him to leave me alone - and
mean it this time. i was gripped in a sudden agony of
despair as i considered that alternative. my mind
rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the next
option.

i could do nothing different. after all, if he was
something sinister, he'd done nothing to hurt me so
far. in fact, i would be a dent in tyler's fender if he
hadn't acted so quickly. so quickly, i argued with
myself, that it might have been sheer reflexes. but if it
was a reflex to save lives, how bad could he be? i
retorted. my head spun around in answerless circles.

there was one thing i was sure of, if i was sure of
anything. the dark edward in my dream last night
was a reflection only of my fear of the word jacob had
spoken, and not edward himself. even so, when i'd
screamed out in terror at the werewolf's lunge, it
wasn't fear for the wolf that brought the cry of "no" to
my lips. it was fear that he would be harmed -

even as he called to me with sharp-edged fangs, i
feared for him. and i knew in that i had my answer. i
didn't know if there ever was a choice, really. i was
already in too deep. now that i knew - if i knew -

i could do nothing about my frightening secret.
because when i thought of him, of his voice, his
hypnotic eyes, the magnetic force of his personality, i
wanted nothing more than to be with him right now.
even if but i couldn't think it. not here, alone in the
darkening forest. not while the rain made it dim as
twilight under the canopy and pattered like footsteps
across the matted earthen floor. i shivered and rose

148 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
quickly from my place of concealment, worried that
somehow the path would have disappeared with the
rain.

but it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out
of the dripping green maze. i followed it hastily, my
hood pulled close around my face, becoming
surprised, as i nearly ran through the trees, at how
far i had come. i started to wonder if i was heading
out at all, or following the path farther into the
confines of the forest. before i could get too panicky,
though, i began to glimpse some open spaces through
the webbed branches. and then i could hear a car
passing on the street, and i was free, charlie's lawn
stretched out in front of me, the house beckoning me,
promising warmth and dry socks.

it was just noon when i got back inside. i went
upstairs and got dressed for the day, jeans and a t-
shirt, since i was staying indoors. it didn't take too
much effort to concentrate on my task for the day, a
paper on macbeth that was due wednesday. i settled
into outlining a rough draft contentedly, more serene
than i'd felt since well, since thursday afternoon, if
i was being honest.

that had always been my way, though. making
decisions was the painful part for me, the part i
agonized over. but once the decision was made, i
simply followed through - usually with relief that the
choice was made. sometimes the relief was tainted by
despair, like my decision to come to forks. but it was
still better than wrestling with the alternatives. this
decision was ridiculously easy to live with.
dangerously easy. and so the day was quiet,
149 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
productive - i finished my paper before eight. charlie
came home with a large catch, and i made a mental
note to pick up a book of recipes for fish while i was
in seattle next week. the chills that flashed up my
spine whenever i thought of that trip were no different
than the ones i'd felt before i'd taken my walk with
jacob black. they should be different, i thought. i
should be afraid - i knew i should be, but i couldn't
feel the right kind of fear.

i slept dreamlessly that night, exhausted from
beginning my day so early, and sleeping so poorly the
night before. i woke, for the second time since
arriving in forks, to the bright yellow light of a sunny
day. i skipped to the window, stunned to see that
there was hardly a cloud in the sky, and those there
were just fleecy little white puffs that couldn't
possibly be carrying any rain. i opened the window -
surprised when it opened silently, without sticking,
not having opened it in who knows how many years
- and sucked in the relatively dry air. it was nearly
warm and hardly windy at all. my blood was electric
in my veins. charlie was finishing breakfast when i
came downstairs, and he picked up on my mood
immediately.

"nice day out," he commented.

"yes," i agreed with a grin.

he smiled back, his brown eyes crinkling around the
edges. when charlie smiled, it was easier to see why
he and my mother had jumped too quickly into an
early marriage. most of the young romantic he'd been
in those days had faded before i'd known him, as the

150 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
curly brown hair - the same color, if not the same
texture, as mine - had dwindled, slowly revealing
more and more of the shiny skin of his forehead. but
when he smiled i could see a little of the man who
had run away with rene when she was just two
years older than i was now.

i ate breakfast cheerily, watching the dust moats
stirring in the sunlight that streamed in the back
window. charlie called out a goodbye, and i heard the
cruiser pull away from the house. i hesitated on my
way out the door, hand on my rain jacket. it would be
tempting fate to leave it home. with a sigh, i folded it
over my arm and stepped out into the brightest light
i'd seen in months.

by dint of much elbow grease, i was able to get both
windows in the truck almost completely rolled down. i
was one of the first ones to school; i hadn't even
checked the clock in my hurry to get outside. i parked
and headed toward the seldom-used picnic benches
on the south side of the cafeteria. the benches were
still a little damp, so i sat on my jacket, glad to have a
use for it. my homework was done - the product of a
slow social life - but there were a few trig problems i
wasn't sure i had right. i took out my book
industriously, but halfway through rechecking the
first problem i was daydreaming, watching the
sunlight play on the red-barked trees. i sketched
inattentively along the margins of my homework. after
a few minutes, i suddenly realized i'd drawn five pairs
of dark eyes staring out of the page at me. i scrubbed
them out with the eraser.

151 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bella!" i heard someone call, and it sounded like
mike. i looked around to realize that the school had
become populated while i'd been sitting there,
absentminded. everyone was in t-shirts, some even in
shorts though the temperature couldn't be over sixty.
mike was coming toward me in khaki shorts and a
striped rugby shirt, waving.

"hey, mike," i called, waving back, unable to be
halfhearted on a morning like this.

he came to sit by me, the tidy spikes of his hair
shining golden in the light, his grin stretching across
his face. he was so delighted to see me, i couldn't
help but feel gratified.

"i never noticed before - your hair has red in it," he
commented, catching between his fingers a strand
that was fluttering in the light breeze.

"only in the sun."

i became just a little uncomfortable as he tucked the
lock behind my ear.

"great day, isn't it?"

"my kind of day," i agreed.

"what did you do yesterday?" his tone was just a bit
too proprietary.

"i mostly worked on my essay." i didn't add that i was
finished with it -

no need to sound smug.

152 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he hit his forehead with the heel of his hand. "oh
yeah - that's due thursday, right?"

"um, wednesday, i think."

"wednesday?" he frowned. "that's not good what
are you writing yours on?"

"whether shakespeare's treatment of the female
characters is misogynistic."

he stared at me like i'd just spoken in pig latin.

"i guess i'll have to get to work on that tonight," he
said, deflated. "i was going to ask if you wanted to go
out."

"oh." i was taken off guard. why couldn't i ever have
a pleasant conversation with mike anymore without it
getting awkward?

"well, we could go to dinner or something and i
could work on it later." he smiled at me hopefully.

"mike" i hated being put on the spot. "i don't think
that would be the best idea."

his face fell. "why?" he asked, his eyes guarded. my
thoughts flickered to edward, wondering if that's
where his thoughts were as well.

"i think and if you ever repeat what i'm saying right
now i will cheerfully beat you to death," i threatened,
"but i think that would hurt jessica's feelings."

he was bewildered, obviously not thinking in that
direction at all.

153 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"jessica?"

"really, mike, are you blind?"

"oh," he exhaled - clearly dazed. i took advantage of
that to make my escape.

"it's time for class, and i can't be late again." i
gathered my books up and stuffed them in my bag.

we walked in silence to building three, and his
expression was distracted. i hoped whatever thoughts
he was immersed in were leading him in the right
direction.

when i saw jessica in trig, she was bubbling with
enthusiasm. she, angela, and lauren were going to
port angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the
dance, and she wanted me to come, too, even though
i didn't need one. i was indecisive. it would be nice to
get out of town with some girlfriends, but lauren
would be there. and who knew what i could be doing
tonight but that was definitely the wrong path to let
my mind wander down. of course i was happy about
the sunlight. but that wasn't completely responsible
for the euphoric mood i was in, not even close.

so i gave her a maybe, telling her i'd have to talk with
charlie first. she talked of nothing but the dance on
the way to spanish, continuing as if without an
interruption when class finally ended, five minutes
late, and we were on our way to lunch. i was far too
lost in my own frenzy of anticipation to notice much
of what she said. i was painfully eager to see not just
him but all the cullens - to compare them with the
new suspicions that plagued my mind. as i crossed
154 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the threshold of the cafeteria, i felt the first true tingle
of fear slither down my spine and settle in my
stomach. would they be able to know what i was
thinking? and then a different feeling jolted through
me - would edward be waiting to sit with me again?

as was my routine, i glanced first toward the cullens'
table. a shiver of panic trembled in my stomach as i
realized it was empty. with dwindling hope, my eyes
scoured the rest of the cafeteria, hoping to find him
alone, waiting for me. the place was nearly filled -
spanish had made us late - but there was no sign of
edward or any of his family. desolation hit me with
crippling strength.

i shambled along behind jessica, not bothering to
pretend to listen anymore.

we were late enough that everyone was already at our
table. i avoided the empty chair next to mike in favor
of one by angela. i vaguely noticed that mike held the
chair out politely for jessica, and that her face lit up
in response.

angela asked a few quiet questions about the
macbeth paper, which i answered as naturally as i
could while spiraling downward in misery. she, too,
invited me to go with them tonight, and i agreed now,
grasping at anything to distract myself.

i realized i'd been holding on to a last shred of hope
when i entered biology, saw his empty seat, and felt a
new wave of disappointment. the rest of the day
passed slowly, dismally. in gym, we had a lecture on
the rules of badminton, the next torture they had
lined up for me. but at least it meant i got to sit and
155 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
listen instead of stumbling around on the court. the
best part was the coach didn't finish, so i got another
day off tomorrow. never mind that the day after they
would arm me with a racket before unleashing me on
the rest of the class.

i was glad to leave campus, so i would be free to pout
and mope before i went out tonight with jessica and
company. but right after i walked in the door of
charlie's house, jessica called to cancel our plans. i
tried to be happy that mike had asked her out to
dinner - i really was relieved that he finally seemed
to be catching on - but my enthusiasm sounded
false in my own ears. she rescheduled our shopping
trip for tomorrow night.

which left me with little in the way of distractions. i
had fish marinating for dinner, with a salad and
bread left over from the night before, so there was
nothing to do there. i spent a focused half hour on
homework, but then i was through with that, too. i
checked my e-mail, reading the backlog of letters from
my mother, getting snippier as they progressed to the
present. i sighed and typed a quick response. mom,

sorry. i've been out. i went to the beach with some
friends. and i had to write a paper.

my excuses were fairly pathetic, so i gave up on that.

it's sunny outside today - i know, i'm shocked, too -
so i'm going to go outside and soak up as much
vitamin d as i can. i love you, bella.

i decided to kill an hour with non-school-related
reading. i had a small collection of books that came
156 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
with me to forks, the shabbiest volume being a
compilation of the works of jane austen. i selected
that one and headed to the backyard, grabbing a
ragged old quilt from the linen cupboard at the top of
the stairs on my way down.

outside in charlie's small, square yard, i folded the
quilt in half and laid it out of the reach of the trees'
shadows on the thick lawn that would always be
slightly wet, no matter how long the sun shone. i lay
on my stomach, crossing my ankles in the air,
flipping through the different novels in the book,
trying to decide which would occupy my mind the
most thoroughly. my favorites were pride and
prejudice and sense and sensibility. i'd read the first
most recently, so i started into sense and sensibility,
only to remember after i began three that the hero of
the story happened to be named edward. angrily, i
turned to mansfield park, but the hero of that piece
was named edmund, and that was just too close.
weren't there any other names available in the late
eighteenth century? i snapped the book shut,
annoyed, and rolled over onto my back. i pushed my
sleeves up as high as they would go, and closed my
eyes. i would think of nothing but the warmth on my
skin, i told myself severely. the breeze was still light,
but it blew tendrils of my hair around my face, and
that tickled a bit. i pulled all my hair over my head,
letting it fan out on the quilt above me, and focused
again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my
cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck,
soaked through my light shirt

157 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the next thing i was conscious of was the sound of
charlie's cruiser turning onto the bricks of the
driveway. i sat up in surprise, realizing the light was
gone, behind the trees, and i had fallen asleep. i
looked around, muddled, with the sudden feeling that
i wasn't alone.

"charlie?" i asked. but i could hear his door
slamming in front of the house.

i jumped up, foolishly edgy, gathering the now-damp
quilt and my book. i ran inside to get some oil heating
on the stove, realizing that dinner would be late.
charlie was hanging up his gun belt and stepping out
of his boots when i came in.

"sorry, dad, dinner's not ready yet - i fell asleep
outside." i stifled a yawn.

"don't worry about it," he said. "i wanted to catch the
score on the game, anyway."

i watched tv with charlie after dinner, for something
to do. there wasn't anything on i wanted to watch,
but he knew i didn't like baseball, so he turned it to
some mindless sitcom that neither of us enjoyed. he
seemed happy, though, to be doing something
together. and it felt good, despite my depression, to
make him happy.

"dad," i said during a commercial, "jessica and
angela are going to look at dresses for the dance
tomorrow night in port angeles, and they wanted me
to help them choose do you mind if i go with them?"

"jessica stanley?" he asked.

158 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and angela weber." i sighed as i gave him the
details. he was confused. "but you're not going to the
dance, right?"

"no, dad, but i'm helping them find dresses - you
know, giving them constructive criticism." i wouldn't
have to explain this to a woman.

"well, okay." he seemed to realize that he was out of
his depth with the girlie stuff. "it's a school night,
though."

"we'll leave right after school, so we can get back
early. you'll be okay for dinner, right?"

"bells, i fed myself for seventeen years before you got
here," he reminded me.

"i don't know how you survived," i muttered, then
added more clearly,

"i'll leave some things for cold-cut sandwiches in the
fridge, okay?

right on top."

it was sunny again in the morning. i awakened with
renewed hope that i grimly tried to suppress. i
dressed for the warmer weather in a deep blue v-neck
blouse - something i'd worn in the dead of winter in
phoenix. i had planned my arrival at school so that i
barely had time to make it to class. with a sinking
heart, i circled the full lot looking for a space, while
also searching for the silver volvo that was clearly not
there. i parked in the last row and hurried to english,
arriving breathless, but subdued, before the final bell.

159 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it was the same as yesterday - i just couldn't keep
little sprouts of hope from budding in my mind, only
to have them squashed painfully as i searched the
lunchroom in vain and sat at my empty biology table.
the port angeles scheme was back on again for
tonight and made all the more attractive by the fact
that lauren had other obligations. i was anxious to
get out of town so i could stop glancing over my
shoulder, hoping to see him appearing out of the blue
the way he always did. i vowed to myself that i would
be in a good mood tonight and not ruin angela's or
jessica's enjoyment in the dress hunting. maybe i
could do a little clothes shopping as well. i refused to
think that i might be shopping alone in seattle this
weekend, no longer interested in the earlier
arrangement. surely he wouldn't cancel without at
least telling me.

after school, jessica followed me home in her old
white mercury so that i could ditch my books and
truck. i brushed through my hair quickly when i was
inside, feeling a slight lift of excitement as i
contemplated getting out of forks. i left a note for
charlie on the table, explaining again where to find
dinner, switched my scruffy wallet from my school
bag to a purse i rarely used, and ran out to join
jessica. we went to angela's house next, and she was
waiting for us. my excitement increased exponentially
as we actually drove out of the town limits.

160 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 port angeles

jess drove faster than the chief, so we made it to port
angeles by four. it had been a while since i'd had a
girls' night out, and the estrogen rush was
invigorating. we listened to whiny rock songs while
jessica jabbered on about the boys we hung out with.
jessica's dinner with mike had gone very well, and
she was hoping that by saturday night they would
have progressed to the first-kiss stage. i smiled to
myself, pleased. angela was passively happy to be
going to the dance, but not really interested in eric.
jess tried to get her to confess who her type was, but
i interrupted with a question about dresses after a
bit, to spare her. angela threw a grateful glance my
way.

port angeles was a beautiful little tourist trap, much
more polished and quaint than forks. but jessica
and angela knew it well, so they didn't plan to waste
time on the picturesque boardwalk by the bay. jess
drove straight to the one big department store in
town, which was a few streets in from the bay area's
visitor-friendly face.

the dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't
exactly sure what that meant. both jessica and
angela seemed surprised and almost disbelieving
when i told them i'd never been to a dance in
phoenix.

161 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"didn't you ever go with a boyfriend or something?"
jess asked dubiously as we walked through the front
doors of the store.

"really," i tried to convince her, not wanting to
confess my dancing problems. "i've never had a
boyfriend or anything close. i didn't go out much."

"why not?" jessica demanded.

"no one asked me," i answered honestly.

she looked skeptical. "people ask you out here," she
reminded me, "and you tell them no." we were in the
juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up
clothes.

"well, except for tyler," angela amended quietly.

"excuse me?" i gasped. "what did you say?"

"tyler told everyone he's taking you to prom," jessica
informed me with suspicious eyes.

"he said what?" i sounded like i was choking.

"i told you it wasn't true," angela murmured to
jessica. i was silent, still lost in shock that was
quickly turning to irritation. but we had found the
dress racks, and now we had work to do.

"that's why lauren doesn't like you," jessica giggled
while we pawed through the clothes.

i ground my teeth. "do you think that if i ran him
over with my truck he would stop feeling guilty about
the accident? that he might give up on making
amends and call it even?"
162 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"maybe," jess snickered. '"if that's why he's doing
this." the dress selection wasn't large, but both of
them found a few things to try on. i sat on a low chair
just inside the dressing room, by the three-way
mirror, trying to control my fuming.

jess was torn between two - one a long, strapless,
basic black number, the other a knee-length electric
blue with spaghetti straps. i encouraged her to go
with the blue; why not play up the eyes? angela chose
a pale pink dress that draped around her tall frame
nicely and brought out honey tints in her light brown
hair. i complimented them both generously and
helped by returning the rejects to their racks. the
whole process was much shorter and easier than
similar trips i'd taken with rene at home. i guess
there was something to be said for limited choices. we
headed over to shoes and accessories. while they
tried things on i merely watched and critiqued, not in
the mood to shop for myself, though i did need new
shoes. the girls'-night high was wearing off in the
wake of my annoyance at tyler, leaving room for the
gloom to move back in.

"angela?" i began, hesitant, while she was trying on a
pair of pink strappy heels - she was overjoyed to
have a date tall enough that she could wear high
heels at all.

jessica had drifted to the jewelry counter and we
were alone.

"yes?" she held her leg out, twisting her ankle to get a
better view of the shoe.

i chickened out. "i like those."
163 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i think i'll get them - though they'll never match
anything but the one dress," she mused.

"oh, go ahead - they're on sale," i encouraged. she
smiled, putting the lid back on a box that contained
more practical-looking off-white shoes. i tried again.
"um, angela" she looked up curiously.

"is it normal for the cullens" - i kept my eyes on
the shoes - "to be out of school a lot?" i failed
miserably in my attempt to sound nonchalant.

"yes, when the weather is good they go backpacking
all the time - even the doctor. they're all real
outdoorsy," she told me quietly, examining her shoes,
too. she didn't ask one question, let alone the
hundreds that jessica would have unleashed. i was
beginning to really like angela.

"oh." i let the subject drop as jessica returned to
show us the rhinestone jewelry she'd found to match
her silver shoes. we planned to go to dinner at a little
italian restaurant on the boardwalk, but the dress
shopping hadn't taken as long as we'd expected. jess
and angela were going to take their clothes back to
the car and then walk down to the bay. i told them i
would meet them at the restaurant in an hour - i
wanted to look for a bookstore. they were both willing
to come with me, but i encouraged them to go have
fun - they didn't know how preoccupied i could get
when surrounded by books; it was something i
preferred to do alone. they walked off to the car
chattering happily, and i headed in the direction jess
pointed out.

164 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i had no trouble finding the bookstore, but it wasn't
what i was looking for. the windows were full of
crystals, dream-catchers, and books about spiritual
healing. i didn't even go inside. through the glass i
could see a fifty-year-old woman with long, gray hair
worn straight down her back, clad in a dress right out
of the sixties, smiling welcomingly from behind the
counter. i decided that was one conversation i could
skip. there had to be a normal bookstore in town.

i meandered through the streets, which were filling
up with end-of-the-workday traffic, and hoped i was
headed toward downtown. i wasn't paying as much
attention as i should to where i was going; i was
wrestling with despair. i was trying so hard not to
think about him, and what angela had said and
more than anything trying to beat down my hopes for
saturday, fearing a disappointment more painful than
the rest, when i looked up to see someone's silver
volvo parked along the street and it all came crashing
down on me. stupid, unreliable vampire, i thought to
myself.

i stomped along in a southerly direction, toward some
glass-fronted shops that looked promising. but when
i got to them, they were just a repair shop and a
vacant space. i still had too much time to go looking
for jess and angela yet, and i definitely needed to get
my mood in hand before i met back up with them. i
ran my fingers through my hair a couple of times and
took some deep breaths before i continued around the
corner. i started to realize, as i crossed another road,
that i was going the wrong direction. the little foot
traffic i had seen was going north, and it looked like

165 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the buildings here were mostly warehouses. i decided
to turn east at the next corner, and then loop around
after a few blocks and try my luck on a different street
on my way back to the boardwalk. a group of four
men turned around the corner i was heading for,
dressed too casually to be heading home from the
office, but they were too grimy to be tourists. as they
approached me, i realized they weren't too many
years older than i was. they were joking loudly
among themselves, laughing raucously and punching
each other's arms. i scooted as far to the inside of the
sidewalk as i could to give them room, walking
swiftly, looking past them to the corner.

"hey, there!" one of them called as they passed, and
he had to be talking to me since no one else was
around. i glanced up automatically. two of them had
paused, the other two were slowing. the closest, a
heavyset, dark-haired man in his early twenties,
seemed to be the one who had spoken. he was
wearing a flannel shirt open over a dirty t-shirt, cut-
off jeans, and sandals. he took half a step toward me.

"hello," i mumbled, a knee-jerk reaction. then i
quickly looked away and walked faster toward the
corner. i could hear them laughing at full volume
behind me.

"hey, wait!" one of them called after me again, but i
kept my head down and rounded the corner with a
sigh of relief. i could still hear them chortling behind
me.

i found myself on a sidewalk leading past the backs of
several somber-colored warehouses, each with large

166 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
bay doors for unloading trucks, padlocked for the
night. the south side of the street had no sidewalk,
only a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire
protecting some kind of engine parts storage yard. i'd
wandered far past the part of port angeles that i, as a
guest, was intended to see. it was getting dark, i
realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the
western horizon, creating an early sunset. the
eastern sky was still clear, but graying, shot through
with streaks of pink and orange. i'd left my jacket in
the car, and a sudden shiver made me cross my arms
tightly across my chest. a single van passed me, and
then the road was empty.

the sky suddenly darkened further, and, as i looked
over my shoulder to glare at the offending cloud, i
realized with a shock that two men were walking
quietly twenty feet behind me.

they were from the same group i'd passed at the
corner, though neither was the dark one who'd
spoken to me. i turned my head forward at once,
quickening my pace. a chill that had nothing to do
with the weather made me shiver again. my purse
was on a shoulder strap and i had it slung across my
body, the way you were supposed to wear it so it
wouldn't get snatched. i knew exactly where my
pepper spray was - still in my duffle bag under the
bed, never unpacked. i didn't have much money with
me, just a twenty and some ones, and i thought about
"accidentally" dropping my bag and walking away.
but a small, frightened voice in the back of my mind
warned me that they might be something worse than
thieves. i listened intently to their quiet footsteps,

167 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
which were much too quiet when compared to the
boisterous noise they'd been making earlier, and it
didn't sound like they were speeding up, or getting
any closer to me. breathe, i had to remind myself.
you don't know they're following you. i continued to
walk as quickly as i could without actually running,
focusing on the right-hand turn that was only a few
yards away from me now. i could hear them, staying
as far back as they'd been before. a blue car turned
onto the street from the south and drove quickly past
me. i thought of jumping out in front of it, but i
hesitated, inhibited, unsure that i was really being
pursued, and then it was too late. i reached the
corner, but a swift glance revealed that it was only a
blind drive to the back of another building. i was half-
turned in anticipation; i had to hurriedly correct and
dash across the narrow drive, back to the sidewalk.
the street ended at the next corner, where there was
a stop sign. i concentrated on the faint footsteps
behind me, deciding whether or not to run. they
sounded farther back, though, and i knew they could
outrun me in any case. i was sure to trip and go
sprawling if i tried to go any faster. the footfalls were
definitely farther back. i risked a quick glance over
my shoulder, and they were maybe forty feet back
now, i saw with relief. but they were both staring at
me.

it seemed to take forever for me to get to the corner. i
kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever
so slightly farther behind with every step. maybe they
realized they had scared me and were sorry. i saw two
cars going north pass the intersection i was heading
for, and i exhaled in relief. there would be more
168 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
people around once i got off this deserted street. i
skipped around the corner with a grateful sigh. and
skidded to a stop.

the street was lined on both sides by blank, doorless,
windowless walls. i could see in the distance, two
intersections down, streetlamps, cars, and more
pedestrians, but they were all too far away. because
lounging against the western building, midway down
the street, were the other two men from the group,
both watching with excited smiles as i froze dead on
the sidewalk. i realized then that i wasn't being
followed. i was being herded.

i paused for only a second, but it felt like a very long
time. i turned then and darted to the other side of the
road. i had a sinking feeling that it was a wasted
attempt. the footsteps behind me were louder now.

"there you are!" the booming voice of the stocky,
dark-haired man shattered the intense quiet and
made me jump. in the gathering darkness, it seemed
like he was looking past me.

"yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making
me jump again as i tried to hurry down the street.
"we just took a little detour." my steps had to slow
now. i was closing the distance between myself and
the lounging pair too quickly. i had a good loud
scream, and i sucked in air, preparing to use it, but
my throat was so dry i wasn't sure how much volume
i could manage. with a quick movement i slipped my
purse over my head, gripping the strap with one
hand, ready to surrender it or use it as weapon as
need demanded.

169 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the thickset man shrugged away from the wall as i
warily came to a stop, and walked slowly into the
street.

"stay away from me," i warned in a voice that was
supposed to sound strong and fearless. but i was
right about the dry throat - no volume.

"don't be like that, sugar," he called, and the raucous
laughter started again behind me.

i braced myself, feet apart, trying to remember
through my panic what little self-defense i knew. heel
of the hand thrust upward, hopefully breaking the
nose or shoving it into the brain. finger through the
eye socket - try to hook around and pop the eye out.
and the standard knee to the groin, of course. that
same pessimistic voice in my mind spoke up then,
reminding me that i probably wouldn't have a chance
against one of them, and there were four. shut up! i
commanded the voice before terror could incapacitate
me. i wasn't going out without taking someone with
me. i tried to swallow so i could build up a decent
scream.

headlights suddenly flew around the corner, the car
almost hitting the stocky one, forcing him to jump
back toward the sidewalk. i dove into the road - this
car was going to stop, or have to hit me. but the silver
car unexpectedly fishtailed around, skidding to a stop
with the passenger door open just a few feet from me.

"get in," a furious voice commanded.

it was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear
vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of
170 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
security washed over me - even before i was off the
street - as soon as i heard his voice. i jumped into
the seat, slamming the door shut behind me.

it was dark in the car, no light had come on with the
opening of the door, and i could barely see his face in
the glow from the dashboard. the tires squealed as he
spun around to face north, accelerating too quickly,
swerving toward the stunned men on the street. i
caught a glimpse of them diving for the sidewalk as
we straightened out and sped toward the harbor.

"put on your seat belt," he commanded, and i realized
i was clutching the seat with both hands. i quickly
obeyed; the snap as the belt connected was loud in
the darkness. he took a sharp left, racing forward,
blowing through several stop signs without a pause.

but i felt utterly safe and, for the moment, totally
unconcerned about where we were going. i stared at
his face in profound relief, relief that went beyond my
sudden deliverance. i studied his flawless features in
the limited light, waiting for my breath to return to
normal, until it occurred to me that his expression
was murderously angry.

"are you okay?" i asked, surprised at how hoarse my
voice sounded.

"no," he said curtly, and his tone was livid.

i sat in silence, watching his face while his blazing
eyes stared straight ahead, until the car came to a
sudden stop. i glanced around, but it was too dark to
see anything beside the vague outline of dark trees
crowding the roadside. we weren't in town anymore.
171 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bella?" he asked, his voice tight, controlled.

"yes?" my voice was still rough. i tried to clear my
throat quietly.

"are you all right?" he still didn't look at me, but the
fury was plain on his face.

"yes," i croaked softly.

"distract me, please," he ordered.

"i'm sorry, what?"

he exhaled sharply.

"just prattle about something unimportant until i
calm down," he clarified, closing his eyes and
pinching the bridge of his nose with his thumb and
forefinger.

"um." i wracked my brain for something trivial. "i'm
going to run over tyler crowley tomorrow before
school?"

he was still squeezing his eyes closed, but the corner
of his mouth twitched.

"why?"

"he's telling everyone that he's taking me to prom -
either he's insane or he's still trying to make up for
almost killing me last well, you remember it, and he
thinks prom is somehow the correct way to do this.
so i figure if i endanger his life, then we're even, and
he can't keep trying to make amends. i don't need
enemies and maybe lauren would back off if he left
me alone. i might have to total his sentra, though. if
172 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he doesn't have a ride he can't take anyone to
prom" i babbled on.

"i heard about that." he sounded a bit more
composed.

"you did?" i asked in disbelief, my previous irritation
flaring. "if he's paralyzed from the neck down, he
can't go to the prom, either," i muttered, refining my
plan.

edward sighed, and finally opened his eyes.

"better?"

"not really."

i waited, but he didn't speak again. he leaned his
head back against the seat, staring at the ceiling of
the car. his face was rigid.

"what's wrong?" my voice came out in a whisper.

"sometimes i have a problem with my temper, bella."
he was whispering, too, and as he stared out the
window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "but it wouldn't
be helpful for me to turn around and hunt down
those" he didn't finish his sentence, looking away,
struggling for a moment to control his anger again.
"at least," he continued, "that's what i'm trying to
convince myself."

"oh." the word seemed inadequate, but i couldn't
think of a better response.

we sat in silence again. i glanced at the clock on the
dashboard. it was past six-thirty.

173 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"jessica and angela will be worried," i murmured. "i
was supposed to meet them."

he started the engine without another word, turning
around smoothly and speeding back toward town. we
were under the streetlights in no time at all, still
going too fast, weaving with ease through the cars
slowly cruising the boardwalk. he parallel-parked
against the curb in a space i would have thought
much too small for the volvo, but he slid in
effortlessly in one try. i looked out the window to see
the lights of la bella italia, and jess and angela just
leaving, pacing anxiously away from us.

"how did you know where ?" i began, but then i just
shook my head. i heard the door open and turned to
see him getting out.

"what are you doing?" i asked.

"i'm taking you to dinner." he smiled slightly, but his
eyes were hard. he stepped out of the car and
slammed the door. i fumbled with my seat belt, and
then hurried to get out of the car as well. he was
waiting for me on the sidewalk.

he spoke before i could. "go stop jessica and angela
before i have to track them down, too. i don't think i
could restrain myself if i ran into your other friends
again."

i shivered at the threat in his voice.

"jess! angela!" i yelled after them, waving when they
turned. they rushed back to me, the pronounced
relief on both their faces simultaneously changing to

174 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
surprise as they saw who i was standing next to. they
hesitated a few feet from us.

"where have you been?" jessica's voice was
suspicious.

"i got lost," i admitted sheepishly. "and then i ran into
edward." i gestured toward him.

"would it be all right if i joined you?" he asked in his
silken, irresistible voice. i could see from their
staggered expressions that he had never unleashed
his talents on them before.

"er sure," jessica breathed.

"um, actually, bella, we already ate while we were
waiting - sorry," angela confessed.

"that's fine - i'm not hungry." i shrugged.

"i think you should eat something." edward's voice
was low, but full of authority. he looked up at jessica
and spoke slightly louder. "do you mind if i drive
bella home tonight? that way you won't have to wait
while she eats."

"uh, no problem, i guess" she bit her lip, trying to
figure out from my expression whether that was what
i wanted. i winked at her. i wanted nothing more than
to be alone with my perpetual savior. there were so
many questions that i couldn't bombard him with till
we were by ourselves.

"okay." angela was quicker than jessica. "see you
tomorrow, bella

175 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
edward." she grabbed jessica's hand and pulled her
toward the car, which i could see a little ways away,
parked across first street. as they got in, jess turned
and waved, her face eager with curiosity. i waved
back, waiting for them to drive away before i turned
to face him.

"honestly, i'm not hungry," i insisted, looking up to
scrutinize his face. his expression was unreadable.

"humor me."

he walked to the door of the restaurant and held it
open with an obstinate expression. obviously, there
would be no further discussion. i walked past him
into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. the
restaurant wasn't crowded - it was the off-season in
port angeles. the host was female, and i understood
the look in her eyes as she assessed edward. she
welcomed him a little more warmly than necessary. i
was surprised by how much that bothered me. she
was several inches taller than i was, and unnaturally
blond.

"a table for two?" his voice was alluring, whether he
was aiming for that or not. i saw her eyes flicker to
me and then away, satisfied by my obvious
ordinariness, and by the cautious, no-contact space
edward kept between us. she led us to a table big
enough for four in the center of the most crowded
area of the dining floor.

i was about to sit, but edward shook his head at me.

"perhaps something more private?" he insisted quietly
to the host. i wasn't sure, but it looked like he
176 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
smoothly handed her a tip. i'd never seen anyone
refuse a table except in old movies.

"sure." she sounded as surprised as i was. she
turned and led us around a partition to a small ring
of booths - all of them empty. "how's this?"

"perfect." he flashed his gleaming smile, dazing her
momentarily.

"um" - she shook her head, blinking - "your server
will be right out." she walked away unsteadily.

"you really shouldn't do that to people," i criticized.
"it's hardly fair."

"do what?"

"dazzle them like that - she's probably
hyperventilating in the kitchen right now."

he seemed confused.

"oh, come on," i said dubiously. "you have to know
the effect you have on people."

he tilted his head to one side, and his eyes were
curious. "i dazzle people?"

"you haven't noticed? do you think everybody gets
their way so easily?" he ignored my questions. "do i
dazzle you?"

"frequently," i admitted.

and then our server arrived, her face expectant. the
hostess had definitely dished behind the scenes, and
this new girl didn't look disappointed. she flipped a

177 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
strand of short black hair behind one ear and smiled
with unnecessary warmth.

"hello. my name is amber, and i'll be your server
tonight. what can i get you to drink?" i didn't miss
that she was speaking only to him. he looked at me.

"i'll have a coke." it sounded like a question.

"two cokes," he said.

"i'll be right back with that," she assured him with
another unnecessary smile. but he didn't see it. he
was watching me.

"what?" i asked when she left.

his eyes stayed fixed on my face. "how are you
feeling?"

"i'm fine," i replied, surprised by his intensity.

"you don't feel dizzy, sick, cold ?"

"should i?"

he chuckled at my puzzled tone.

"well, i'm actually waiting for you to go into shock."
his face twisted up into that perfect crooked smile.

"i don't think that will happen," i said after i could
breathe again.

"i've always been very good at repressing unpleasant
things."

"just the same, i'll feel better when you have some
sugar and food in you."
178 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
right on cue, the waitress appeared with our drinks
and a basket of breadsticks. she stood with her back
to me as she placed them on the table.

"are you ready to order?" she asked edward.

"bella?" he asked. she turned unwillingly toward me.
i picked the first thing i saw on the menu. "um i'll
have the mushroom ravioli."

"and you?" she turned back to him with a smile.

"nothing for me," he said. of course not.

"let me know if you change your mind." the coy smile
was still in place, but he wasn't looking at her, and
she left dissatisfied.

"drink," he ordered.

i sipped at my soda obediently, and then drank more
deeply, surprised by how thirsty i was. i realized i had
finished the whole thing when he pushed his glass
toward me.

"thanks," i muttered, still thirsty. the cold from the
icy soda was radiating through my chest, and i
shivered.

"are you cold?"

"it's just the coke," i explained, shivering again.

"don't you have a jacket?" his voice was disapproving.

"yes." i looked at the empty bench next to me. "oh -
i left it in jessica's car," i realized.

179 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
edward was shrugging out of his jacket. i suddenly
realized that i had never once noticed what he was
wearing - not just tonight, but ever. i just couldn't
seem to look away from his face. i made myself look
now, focusing. he was removing a light beige leather
jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck
sweater. it fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular
his chest was.

he handed me the jacket, interrupting my ogling.

"thanks," i said again, sliding my arms into his
jacket. it was cold -

the way my jacket felt when i first picked it up in the
morning, hanging in the drafty hallway. i shivered
again. it smelled amazing. i inhaled, trying to identify
the delicious scent. it didn't smell like cologne. the
sleeves were much too long; i shoved them back so i
could free my hands.

"that color blue looks lovely with your skin," he said,
watching me. i was surprised; i looked down,
flushing, of course.

he pushed the bread basket toward me.

"really, i'm not going into shock," i protested.

"you should be - a normal person would be. you
don't even look shaken." he seemed unsettled. he
stared into my eyes, and i saw how light his eyes
were, lighter than i'd ever seen them, golden
butterscotch.

"i feel very safe with you," i confessed, mesmerized
into telling the truth again.
180 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
that displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. he
shook his head, frowning.

"this is more complicated than i'd planned," he
murmured to himself. i picked up a breadstick and
began nibbling on the end, measuring his expression.
i wondered when it would be okay to start questioning
him.

"usually you're in a better mood when your eyes are
so light," i commented, trying to distract him from
whatever thought had left him frowning and somber.

he stared at me, stunned. "what?"

"you're always crabbier when your eyes are black - i
expect it then," i went on. "i have a theory about
that."

his eyes narrowed. "more theories?"

"mm-hm." i chewed on a small bite of the bread,
trying to look indifferent.

"i hope you were more creative this time or are you
still stealing from comic books?" his faint smile was
mocking; his eyes were still tight.

"well, no, i didn't get it from a comic book, but i
didn't come up with it on my own, either," i
confessed.

"and?" he prompted.

but then the waitress strode around the partition
with my food. i realized we'd been unconsciously
leaning toward each other across the table, because

181 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
we both straightened up as she approached. she set
the dish in front of me - it looked pretty good - and
turned quickly to edward.

"did you change your mind?" she asked. "isn't there
anything i can get you?" i may have been imagining
the double meaning in her words.

"no, thank you, but some more soda would be nice."
he gestured with a long white hand to the empty cups
in front of me.

"sure." she removed the empty glasses and walked
away.

"you were saying?" he asked.

"i'll tell you about it in the car. if" i paused.

"there are conditions?" he raised one eyebrow, his
voice ominous.

"i do have a few questions, of course."

"of course."

the waitress was back with two more cokes. she sat
them down without a word this time, and left again.

i took a sip.

"well, go ahead," he pushed, his voice still hard. i
started with the most undemanding. or so i thought.
"why are you in port angeles?"

he looked down, folding his large hands together
slowly on the table. his eyes flickered up at me from
under his lashes, the hint of a smirk on his face.

182 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"next."

"but that's the easiest one," i objected.

"next," he repeated.

i looked down, frustrated. i unrolled my silverware,
picked up my fork, and carefully speared a ravioli. i
put it in my mouth slowly, still looking down, chewing
while i thought. the mushrooms were good. i
swallowed and took another sip of coke before i
looked up.

"okay, then." i glared at him, and continued slowly.
"let's say, hypothetically of course, that someone
could know what people are thinking, read minds,
you know - with a few exceptions."

"just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically."

"all right, with one exception, then." i was thrilled
that he was playing along, but i tried to seem casual.

"how does that work? what are the limitations? how
would that someone

find someone else at exactly the right time? how
would he know she was in trouble?" i wondered if my
convoluted questions even made sense.

"hypothetically?" he asked.

"sure."

"well, if that someone"

"let's call him 'joe,'" i suggested.

183 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he smiled wryly. "joe, then. if joe had been paying
attention, the timing wouldn't have needed to be quite
so exact." he shook his head, rolling his eyes. "only
you could get into trouble in a town this small. you
would have devastated their crime rate statistics for a
decade, you know."

"we were speaking of a hypothetical case," i reminded
him frostily. he laughed at me, his eyes warm.

"yes, we were," he agreed. "shall we call you 'jane'?"

"how did you know?" i asked, unable to curb my
intensity. i realized i was leaning toward him again.

he seemed to be wavering, torn by some internal
dilemma. his eyes locked with mine, and i guessed he
was making the decision right then whether or not to
simply tell me the truth.

"you can trust me, you know," i murmured. i reached
forward, without thinking, to touch his folded hands,
but he slid them away minutely, and i pulled my
hand back.

"i don't know if i have a choice anymore." his voice
was almost a whisper. "i was wrong - you're much
more observant than i gave you credit for."

"i thought you were always right."

"i used to be." he shook his head again. "i was wrong
about you on one other thing, as well. you're not a
magnet for accidents - that's not a broad enough
classification. you are a magnet for trouble. if there is
anything dangerous within a ten-mile radius, it will
invariably find you."
184 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and you put yourself into that category?" i guessed.
his face turned cold, expressionless. "unequivocally."
i stretched my hand across the table again - ignoring
him when he pulled back slightly once more - to
touch the back of his hand shyly with my fingertips.
his skin was cold and hard, like a stone.

"thank you." my voice was fervent with gratitude.
"that's twice now." his face softened. "let's not try for
three, agreed?" i scowled, but nodded. he moved his
hand out from under mine, placing both of his under
the table. but he leaned toward me.

"i followed you to port angeles," he admitted,
speaking in a rush. "i've never tried to keep a specific
person alive before, and it's much more troublesome
than i would have believed. but that's probably just
because it's you. ordinary people seem to make it
through the day without so many catastrophes." he
paused. i wondered if it should bother me that he was
following me; instead i felt a strange surge of
pleasure. he stared, maybe wondering why my lips
were curving into an involuntary smile.

"did you ever think that maybe my number was up
the first time, with the van, and that you've been
interfering with fate?" i speculated, distracting myself.

"that wasn't the first time," he said, and his voice was
hard to hear. i stared at him in amazement, but he
was looking down. "your number was up the first
time i met you."

i felt a spasm of fear at his words, and the abrupt
memory of his violent black glare that first day but
the overwhelming sense of safety i felt in his presence
185 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
stifled it. by the time he looked up to read my eyes,
there was no trace of fear in them.

"you remember?" he asked, his angel's face grave.

"yes." i was calm.

"and yet here you sit." there was a trace of disbelief
in his voice; he raised one eyebrow.

"yes, here i sit because of you." i paused. "because
somehow you knew how to find me today ?" i
prompted.

he pressed his lips together, staring at me through
narrowed eyes, deciding again. his eyes flashed down
to my full plate, and then back to me.

"you eat, i'll talk," he bargained.

i quickly scooped up another ravioli and popped it in
my mouth.

"it's harder than it should be - keeping track of you.
usually i can find someone very easily, once i've
heard their mind before." he looked at me anxiously,
and i realized i had frozen. i made myself swallow,
then stabbed another ravioli and tossed it in.

"i was keeping tabs on jessica, not carefully - like i
said, only you could find trouble in port angeles -
and at first i didn't notice when you took off on your
own. then, when i realized that you weren't with her
anymore, i went looking for you at the bookstore i
saw in her head. i could tell that you hadn't gone in,
and that you'd gone south and i knew you would
have to turn around soon. so i was just waiting for

186 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
you, randomly searching through the thoughts of
people on the street - to see if anyone had noticed
you so i would know where you were. i had no reason
to be worried but i was strangely anxious" he was
lost in thought, staring past me, seeing things i
couldn't imagine.

"i started to drive in circles, still listening. the sun
was finally setting, and i was about to get out and
follow you on foot. and then -" he stopped, clenching
his teeth together in sudden fury. he made an effort
to calm himself.

"then what?" i whispered. he continued to stare over
my head.

"i heard what they were thinking," he growled, his
upper lip curling slightly back over his teeth. "i saw
your face in his mind." he suddenly leaned forward,
one elbow appearing on the table, his hand covering
his eyes. the movement was so swift it startled me.

"it was very hard - you can't imagine how hard -
for me to simply take you away, and leave them
alive." his voice was muffled by his arm. "i could have
let you go with jessica and angela, but i was afraid if
you left me alone, i would go looking for them," he
admitted in a whisper. i sat quietly, dazed, my
thoughts incoherent. my hands were folded in my lap,
and i was leaning weakly against the back of the seat.
he still had his face in his hand, and he was as still
as if he'd been carved from the stone his skin
resembled.

finally he looked up, his eyes seeking mine, full of his
own questions.
187 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"are you ready to go home?" he asked.

"i'm ready to leave," i qualified, overly grateful that we
had the hour-long ride home together. i wasn't ready
to say goodbye to him. the waitress appeared as if
she'd been called. or watching.

"how are we doing?" she asked edward.

"we're ready for the check, thank you." his voice was
quiet, rougher, still reflecting the strain of our
conversation. it seemed to muddle her. he looked up,
waiting.

"s-sure," she stuttered. "here you go." she pulled a
small leather folder from the front pocket of her black
apron and handed it to him. there was a bill in his
hand already. he slipped it into the folder and handed
it right back to her.

"no change." he smiled. then he stood up, and i
scrambled awkwardly to my feet.

she smiled invitingly at him again. "you have a nice
evening." he didn't look away from me as he thanked
her. i suppressed a smile. he walked close beside me
to the door, still careful not to touch me. i
remembered what jessica had said about her
relationship with mike, how they were almost to the
first-kiss stage. i sighed. edward seemed to hear me,
and he looked down curiously. i looked at the
sidewalk, grateful that he didn't seem to be able to
know what i was thinking.

he opened the passenger door, holding it for me as i
stepped in, shutting it softly behind me. i watched

188 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
him walk around the front of the car, amazed, yet
again, by how graceful he was. i probably should have
been used to that by now - but i wasn't. i had a
feeling edward wasn't the kind of person anyone got
used to.

once inside the car, he started the engine and turned
the heater on high. it had gotten very cold, and i
guessed the good weather was at an end. i was warm
in his jacket, though, breathing in the scent of it
when i thought he couldn't see.

edward pulled out through the traffic, apparently
without a glance, flipping around to head toward the
freeway.

"now," he said significantly, "it's your turn."

189 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 theory

"can i ask just one more?" i pleaded as edward
accelerated much too quickly down the quiet street.
he didn't seem to be paying any attention to the road.

he sighed.

"one," he agreed. his lips pressed together into a
cautious line.

"well you said you knew i hadn't gone into the
bookstore, and that i had gone south. i was just
wondering how you knew that." he looked away,
deliberating.

"i thought we were past all the evasiveness," i
grumbled. he almost smiled.

"fine, then. i followed your scent." he looked at the
road, giving me time to compose my face. i couldn't
think of an acceptable response to that, but i filed it
carefully away for future study. i tried to refocus. i
wasn't ready to let him be finished, now that he was
finally explaining things.

"and then you didn't answer one of my first
questions" i stalled. he looked at me with
disapproval. "which one?"

"how does it work - the mind-reading thing? can
you read anybody's mind, anywhere? how do you do
it? can the rest of your family ?" i felt silly, asking
for clarification on make-believe.
190 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"that's more than one," he pointed out. i simply
intertwined my fingers and gazed at him, waiting.

"no, it's just me. and i can't hear anyone, anywhere. i
have to be fairly close. the more familiar someone's
'voice' is, the farther away i can hear them. but still,
no more than a few miles." he paused thoughtfully.

"it's a little like being in a huge hall filled with people,
everyone talking at once. it's just a hum - a buzzing
of voices in the background. until i focus on one
voice, and then what they're thinking is clear.

"most of the time i tune it all out - it can be very
distracting. and then it's easier to seem normal" - he
frowned as he said the word - "when i'm not
accidentally answering someone's thoughts rather
than their words."

"why do you think you can't hear me?" i asked
curiously. he looked at me, his eyes enigmatic.

"i don't know," he murmured. "the only guess i have
is that maybe your mind doesn't work the same way
the rest of theirs do. like your thoughts are on the
am frequency and i'm only getting fm." he grinned at
me, suddenly amused.

"my mind doesn't work right? i'm a freak?" the words
bothered me more than they should - probably
because his speculation hit home. i'd always
suspected as much, and it embarrassed me to have it
confirmed.

"i hear voices in my mind and you're worried that
you're the freak," he laughed. "don't worry, it's just a

191 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
theory" his face tightened. "which brings us back to
you."

i sighed. how to begin?

"aren't we past all the evasions now?" he reminded
me softly. i looked away from his face for the first
time, trying to find words. i happened to notice the
speedometer.

"holy crow!" i shouted. "slow down!"

"what's wrong?" he was startled. but the car didn't
decelerate.

"you're going a hundred miles an hour!" i was still
shouting. i shot a panicky glance out the window, but
it was too dark to see much. the road was only visible
in the long patch of bluish brightness from the
headlights. the forest along both sides of the road
was like a black wall

- as hard as a wall of steel if we veered off the road
at this speed.

"relax, bella." he rolled his eyes, still not slowing.

"are you trying to kill us?" i demanded.

"we're not going to crash."

i tried to modulate my voice. "why are you in such a
hurry?"

"i always drive like this." he turned to smile crookedly
at me.

"keep your eyes on the road!"

192 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i've never been in an accident, bella - i've never
even gotten a ticket." he grinned and tapped his
forehead. "built-in radar detector."

"very funny." i fumed. "charlie's a cop, remember? i
was raised to abide by traffic laws. besides, if you
turn us into a volvo pretzel around a tree trunk, you
can probably just walk away."

"probably," he agreed with a short, hard laugh. "but
you can't." he sighed, and i watched with relief as the
needle gradually drifted toward eighty. "happy?"

"almost."

"i hate driving slow," he muttered.

"this is slow?"

"enough commentary on my driving," he snapped.
"i'm still waiting for your latest theory."

i bit my lip. he looked down at me, his honey eyes
unexpectedly gentle.

"i won't laugh," he promised.

"i'm more afraid that you'll be angry with me."

"is it that bad?"

"pretty much, yeah."

he waited. i was looking down at my hands, so i
couldn't see his expression.

"go ahead." his voice was calm.

"i don't know how to start," i admitted.
193 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why don't you start at the beginning you said you
didn't come up with this on your own."

"no."

"what got you started - a book? a movie?" he
probed.

"no - it was saturday, at the beach." i risked a
glance up at his face. he looked puzzled.

"i ran into an old family friend -jacob black," i
continued. "his dad and charlie have been friends
since i was a baby."

he still looked confused.

"his dad is one of the quileute elders." i watched him
carefully. his confused expression froze in place. "we
went for a walk -" i edited all my scheming out of the
story "- and he was telling me some old legends -

trying to scare me, i think. he told me one" i
hesitated.

"go on," he said.

"about vampires." i realized i was whispering. i
couldn't look at his face now. but i saw his knuckles
tighten convulsively on the wheel.

"and you immediately thought of me?" still calm.

"no. he mentioned your family."

he was silent, staring at the road.

i was worried suddenly, worried about protecting
jacob.
194 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"he just thought it was a silly superstition," i said
quickly. "he didn't expect me to think anything of it."
it didn't seem like enough; i had to confess. "it was
my fault, i forced him to tell me."

"why?"

"lauren said something about you - she was trying
to provoke me. and an older boy from the tribe said
your family didn't come to the reservation, only it
sounded like he meant something different. so i got
jacob alone and i tricked it out of him," i admitted,
hanging my head. he startled me by laughing. i
glared up at him. he was laughing, but his eyes were
fierce, staring ahead.

"tricked him how?" he asked.

"i tried to flirt - it worked better than i thought it
would." disbelief colored my tone as i remembered.

"i'd like to have seen that." he chuckled darkly. "and
you accused me of dazzling people - poor jacob
black."

i blushed and looked out my window into the night.

"what did you do then?" he asked after a minute.

"i did some research on the internet."

"and did that convince you?" his voice sounded
barely interested. but his hands were clamped hard
onto the steering wheel.

"no. nothing fit. most of it was kind of silly. and
then" i stopped.

195 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what?"

"i decided it didn't matter," i whispered.

"it didn't matter?" his tone made me look up - i had
finally broken through his carefully composed mask.
his face was incredulous, with just a hint of the anger
i'd feared.

"no," i said softly. "it doesn't matter to me what you
are." a hard, mocking edge entered his voice. "you
don't care if i'm a monster?

if i'm not human!"

"no."

he was silent, staring straight ahead again. his face
was bleak and cold.

"you're angry," i sighed. "i shouldn't have said
anything."

"no," he said, but his tone was as hard as his face.
"i'd rather know what you're thinking - even if what
you're thinking is insane."

"so i'm wrong again?" i challenged.

"that's not what i was referring to. 'it doesn't matter'!"
he quoted, gritting his teeth together.

"i'm right?" i gasped.

"does it matter?"

i took a deep breath.

196 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"not really." i paused. "but i am curious." my voice, at
least, was composed.

he was suddenly resigned. "what are you curious
about?"

"how old are you?"

"seventeen," he answered promptly.

"and how long have you been seventeen?"

his lips twitched as he stared at the road. "a while,"
he admitted at last.

"okay." i smiled, pleased that he was still being
honest with me. he stared down at me with watchful
eyes, much as he had before, when he was worried i
would go into shock. i smiled wider in
encouragement, and he frowned.

"don't laugh - but how can you come out during the
daytime?" he laughed anyway. "myth."

"burned by the sun?"

"myth."

"sleeping in coffins?"

"myth." he hesitated for a moment, and a peculiar
tone entered his voice.

"i can't sleep."

it took me a minute to absorb that. "at all?"

"never," he said, his voice nearly inaudible. he turned
to look at me with a wistful expression. the golden
197 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
eyes held mine, and i lost my train of thought. i
stared at him until he looked away.

"you haven't asked me the most important question
yet." his voice was hard now, and when he looked at
me again his eyes were cold. i blinked, still dazed.
"which one is that?"

"you aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked
sarcastically.

"oh," i murmured, "that."

"yes, that." his voice was bleak. "don't you want to
know if i drink blood?"

i flinched. "well, jacob said something about that."

"what did jacob say?" he asked flatly.

"he said you didn't hunt people. he said your family
wasn't supposed to be dangerous because you only
hunted animals."

"he said we weren't dangerous?" his voice was deeply
skeptical.

"not exactly. he said you weren't supposed to be
dangerous. but the quileutes still didn't want you on
their land, just in case." he looked forward, but i
couldn't tell if he was watching the road or not.

"so was he right? about not hunting people?" i tried
to keep my voice as even as possible.

"the quileutes have a long memory," he whispered. i
took it as a confirmation.

198 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"don't let that make you complacent, though," he
warned me. "they're right to keep their distance from
us. we are still dangerous."

"i don't understand."

"we try," he explained slowly. "we're usually very
good at what we do. sometimes we make mistakes.
me, for example, allowing myself to be alone with
you."

"this is a mistake?" i heard the sadness in my voice,
but i didn't know if he could as well.

"a very dangerous one," he murmured.

we were both silent then. i watched the headlights
twist with the curves of the road. they moved too fast;
it didn't look real, it looked like a video game. i was
aware of the time slipping away so quickly, like the
black road beneath us, and i was hideously afraid
that i would never have another chance to be with
him like this again - openly, the walls between us
gone for once. his words hinted at an end, and i
recoiled from the idea. i couldn't waste one minute i
had with him.

"tell me more," i asked desperately, not caring what
he said, just so i could hear his voice again.

he looked at me quickly, startled by the change in my
tone. "what more do you want to know?"

"tell me why you hunt animals instead of people," i
suggested, my voice still tinged with desperation. i
realized my eyes were wet, and i fought against the
grief that was trying to overpower me.
199 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i don't want to be a monster." his voice was very low.

"but animals aren't enough?"

he paused. "i can't be sure, of course, but i'd compare
it to living on tofu and soy milk; we call ourselves
vegetarians, our little inside joke. it doesn't
completely satiate the hunger - or rather thirst. but
it keens us strong enough to resist. most of the time."
his tone turned ominous.

"sometimes it's more difficult than others."

"is it very difficult for you now?" i asked.

he sighed. "yes."

"but you're not hungry now," i said confidently -
stating, not asking.

"why do you think that?"

"your eyes. i told you i had a theory. i've noticed that
people - men in particular - are crabbier when
they're hungry."

he chuckled. "you are observant, aren't you?"

i didn't answer; i just listened to the sound of his
laugh, committing it to memory.

"were you hunting this weekend, with emmett?" i
asked when it was quiet again.

"yes." he paused for a second, as if deciding whether
or not to say something. "i didn't want to leave, but it
was necessary. it's a bit easier to be around you when
i'm not thirsty."

200 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why didn't you want to leave?"

"it makes me anxious to be away from you." his
eyes were gentle but intense, and they seemed to be
making my bones turn soft. "i wasn't joking when i
asked you to try not to fall in the ocean or get run
over last thursday. i was distracted all weekend,
worrying about you. and after what happened
tonight, i'm surprised that you did make it through a
whole weekend unscathed." he shook his head, and
then seemed to remember something. "well, not
totally unscathed."

"what?"

"your hands," he reminded me. i looked down at my
palms, at the almost-healed scrapes across the heels
of my hands. his eyes missed nothing.

"i fell," i sighed.

"that's what i thought." his lips curved up at the
corners. "i suppose, being you, it could have been
much worse - and that possibility tormented me the
entire time i was away. it was a very long three days. i
really got on emmett's nerves." he smiled ruefully at
me.

"three days? didn't you just get back today?"

"no, we got back sunday."

"then why weren't any of you in school?" i was
frustrated, almost angry as i thought of how much
disappointment i had suffered because of his
absence.

201 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"well, you asked if the sun hurt me, and it doesn't.
but i can't go out in the sunlight - at least, not
where anyone can see."

"why?"

"i'll show you sometime," he promised.

i thought about it for a moment.

"you might have called me," i decided.

he was puzzled. "but i knew you were safe."

"but i didn't know where you were. i -" i hesitated,
dropping my eyes.

"what?" his velvety voice was compelling.

"i didn't like it. not seeing you. it makes me anxious,
too." i blushed to be saying this out loud.

he was quiet. i glanced up, apprehensive, and saw
that his expression was pained.

"ah," he groaned quietly. "this is wrong." i couldn't
understand his response. "what did i say?"

"don't you see, bella? it's one thing for me to make
myself miserable, but a wholly other thing for you to
be so involved." he turned his anguished eyes to the
road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to
understand. "i don't want to hear that you feel that
way." his voice was low but urgent. his words cut me.
"it's wrong. it's not safe. i'm dangerous, bella -
please, grasp that."

"no." i tried very hard not to look like a sulky child.

202 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm serious," he growled.

"so am i. i told you, it doesn't matter what you are.
it's too late." his voice whipped out, low and harsh.
"never say that." i bit my lip and was glad he couldn't
know how much that hurt. i stared out at the road.
we must be close now. he was driving much too fast.

"what are you thinking?" he asked, his voice still raw.
i just shook my head, not sure if i could speak. i
could feel his gaze on my face, but i kept my eyes
forward.

"are you crying?" he sounded appalled. i hadn't
realized the moisture in my eyes had brimmed over. i
quickly rubbed my hand across my cheek, and sure
enough, traitor tears were there, betraying me.

"no," i said, but my voice cracked.

i saw him reach toward me hesitantly with his right
hand, but then he stopped and placed it slowly back
on the steering wheel.

"i'm sorry." his voice burned with regret. i knew he
wasn't just apologizing for the words that had upset
me.

the darkness slipped by us in silence.

"tell me something," he asked after another minute,
and i could hear him struggle to use a lighter tone.

"yes?"

"what were you thinking tonight, just before i came
around the corner? i couldn't understand your

203 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
expression - you didn't look that scared, you looked
like you were concentrating very hard on something."

"i was trying to remember how to incapacitate an
attacker - you know, self-defense. i was going to
smash his nose into his brain." i thought of the dark-
haired man with a surge of hate.

"you were going to fight them?" this upset him.
"didn't you think about running?"

"i fall down a lot when i run," i admitted.

"what about screaming for help?"

"i was getting to that part."

he shook his head. "you were right - i'm definitely
fighting fate trying to keep you alive."

i sighed. we were slowing, passing into the
boundaries of forks. it had taken less than twenty
minutes.

"will i see you tomorrow?" i demanded.

"yes - i have a paper due, too." he smiled. "i'll save
you a seat at lunch."

it was silly, after everything we'd been through
tonight, how that little promise sent flutters through
my stomach, and made me unable to speak. we were
in front of charlie's house. the lights were on, my
truck in its place, everything utterly normal. it was
like waking from a dream. he stopped the car, but i
didn't move.

"do you promise to be there tomorrow?"
204 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i promise."

i considered that for a moment, then nodded. i pulled
his jacket off, taking one last whiff.

"you can keep it - you don't have a jacket for
tomorrow," he reminded me. i handed it back to him.
"i don't want to have to explain to charlie."

"oh, right." he grinned.

i hesitated, my hand on the door handle, trying to
prolong the moment.

"bella?" he asked in a different tone - serious, but
hesitant.

"yes?" i turned back to him too eagerly.

"will you promise me something?"

"yes," i said, and instantly regretted my unconditional
agreement. what if he asked me to stay away from
him? i couldn't keep that promise.

"don't go into the woods alone."

i stared at him in blank confusion. "why?"

he frowned, and his eyes were tight as he stared past
me out the window.

"i'm not always the most dangerous thing out there.
let's leave it at that."

i shuddered slightly at the sudden bleakness in his
voice, but i was relieved. this, at least, was an easy
promise to honor. "whatever you say."

205 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'll see you tomorrow," he sighed, and i knew he
wanted me to leave now.

"tomorrow, then." i opened the door unwillingly.

"bella?" i turned and he was leaning toward me, his
pale, glorious face just inches from mine. my heart
stopped beating.

"sleep well," he said. his breath blew in my face,
stunning me. it was the same exquisite scent that
clung to his jacket, but in a more concentrated form. i
blinked, thoroughly dazed. he leaned away. i was
unable to move until my brain had somewhat
unscrambled itself. then i stepped out of the car
awkwardly, having to use the frame for support. i
thought i heard him chuckle, but the sound was too
quiet for me to be certain.

he waited till i had stumbled to the front door, and
then i heard his engine quietly rev. i turned to watch
the silver car disappear around the corner. i realized
it was very cold.

i reached for the key mechanically, unlocked the
door, and stepped inside. charlie called from the
living room. "bella?"

"yeah, dad, it's me." i walked in to see him. he was
watching a baseball game.

"you're home early."

"am i?" i was surprised.

"it's not even eight yet," he told me. "did you girls
have fun?"
206 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yeah - it was lots of fun." my head was spinning as
i tried to remember all the way back to the girls' night
out i had planned. "they both found dresses."

"are you all right?"

"i'm just tired. i did a lot of walking."

"well, maybe you should go lie down." he sounded
concerned. i wondered what my face looked like.

"i'm just going to call jessica first."

"weren't you just with her?" he asked, surprised.

"yes - but i left my jacket in her car. i want to make
sure she brings it tomorrow."

"well, give her a chance to get home first."

"right," i agreed.

i went to the kitchen and fell, exhausted, into a chair.
i was really feeling dizzy now. i wondered if i was
going to go into shock after all. get a grip, i told
myself.

the phone rang suddenly, startling me. i yanked it off
the hook.

"hello?" i asked breathlessly.

"bella?"

"hey, jess, i was just going to call you."

"you made it home?" her voice was relieved and
surprised.

207 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yes. i left my jacket in your car - could you bring it
to me tomorrow?"

"sure. but tell me what happened!" she demanded.

"um, tomorrow - in trig, okay?"

she caught on quickly. "oh, is your dad there?"

"yes, that's right."

"okay, i'll talk to you tomorrow, then. bye!" i could
hear the impatience in her voice.

"bye, jess."

i walked up the stairs slowly, a heavy stupor clouding
my mind. i went through the motions of getting ready
for bed without paying any attention to what i was
doing. it wasn't until i was in the shower - the water
too hot, burning my skin - that i realized i was
freezing. i shuddered violently for several minutes
before the steaming spray could finally relax my rigid
muscles. then i stood in the shower, too tired to
move, until the hot water began to run out.

i stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel,
trying to hold the heat from the water in so the aching
shivers wouldn't return. i dressed for bed swiftly and
climbed under my quilt, curling into a ball, hugging
myself to keep warm. a few small shudders trembled
through me. my mind still swirled dizzily, full of
images i couldn't understand, and some i fought to
repress. nothing seemed clear at first, but as i fell
gradually closer to unconsciousness, a few certainties
became evident. about three things i was absolutely
positive. first, edward was a vampire. second, there
208 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
was part of him - and i didn't know how potent that
part might be - that thirsted for my blood. and third,
i was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with
him.

209 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 interrogations

it was very hard, in the morning, to argue with the
part of me that was sure last night was a dream.
logic wasn't on my side, or common sense. i clung to
the parts i couldn't have imagined - like his smell. i
was sure i could never have dreamed that up on my
own.

it was foggy and dark outside my window, absolutely
perfect. he had no reason not to be in school today. i
dressed in my heavy clothes, remembering i didn't
have a jacket. further proof that my memory was
real. when i got downstairs, charlie was gone again
- i was running later than i'd realized. i swallowed a
granola bar in three bites, chased it down with milk
straight from the carton, and then hurried out the
door. hopefully the rain would hold off until i could
find jessica. it was unusually foggy; the air was
almost smoky with it. the mist was ice cold where it
clung to the exposed skin on my face and neck. i
couldn't wait to get the heat going in my truck. it was
such a thick fog that i was a few feet down the
driveway before i realized there was a car in it: a silver
car. my heart thudded, stuttered, and then picked up
again in double time.

i didn't see where he came from, but suddenly he was
there, pulling the door open for me.

"do you want to ride with me today?" he asked,
amused by my expression as he caught me by
surprise yet again. there was uncertainty in his voice.
210 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he was really giving me a choice - i was free to
refuse, and part of him hoped for that. it was a vain
hope.

"yes, thank you," i said, trying to keep my voice calm.
as i stepped into the warm car, i noticed his tan
jacket was slung over the headrest of the passenger
seat. the door closed behind me, and, sooner than
should be possible, he was sitting next to me, starting
the car.

"i brought the jacket for you. i didn't want you to get
sick or something." his voice was guarded. i noticed
that he wore no jacket himself, just a light gray knit
v-neck shirt with long sleeves. again, the fabric clung
to his perfectly muscled chest. it was a colossal
tribute to his face that it kept my eyes away from his
body.

"i'm not quite that delicate," i said, but i pulled the
jacket onto my lap, pushing my arms through the
too-long sleeves, curious to see if the scent could
possibly be as good as i remembered. it was better.

"aren't you?" he contradicted in a voice so low i
wasn't sure if he meant for me to hear.

we drove through the fog-shrouded streets, always
too fast, feeling awkward. i was, at least. last night
all the walls were down almost all. i didn't know if
we were still being as candid today. it left me tongue-
tied. i waited for him to speak.

he turned to smirk at me. "what, no twenty questions
today?"

211 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"do my questions bother you?" i asked, relieved.

"not as much as your reactions do." he looked like he
was joking, but i couldn't be sure.

i frowned. "do i react badly?"

"no, that's the problem. you take everything so coolly
- it's unnatural. it makes me wonder what you're
really thinking."

"i always tell you what i'm really thinking."

"you edit," he accused.

"not very much."

"enough to drive me insane."

"you don't want to hear it," i mumbled, almost
whispered. as soon as the words were out, i regretted
them. the pain in my voice was very faint; i could
only hope he hadn't noticed it.

he didn't respond, and i wondered if i had ruined the
mood. his face was unreadable as we drove into the
school parking lot. something occurred to me
belatedly.

"where's the rest of your family?" i asked - more
than glad to be alone with him, but remembering that
his car was usually full.

"they took rosalie's car." he shrugged as he parked
next to a glossy red convertible with the top up.
"ostentatious, isn't it?"

212 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"um, wow," i breathed. "if she has that, why does she
ride with you?"

"like i said, it's ostentatious. we try to blend in."

"you don't succeed." i laughed and shook my head as
we got out of the car. i wasn't late anymore; his
lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of
time. "so why did rosalie drive today if it's more
conspicuous?"

"hadn't you noticed? i'm breaking all the rules now."
he met me at the front of the car, staying very close to
my side as we walked onto campus. i wanted to close
that little distance, to reach out and touch him, but i
was afraid he wouldn't like me to.

"why do you have cars like that at all?" i wondered
aloud. "if you're looking for privacy?"

"an indulgence," he admitted with an impish smile.
"we all like to drive fast."

"figures," i muttered under my breath.

under the shelter of the cafeteria roof's overhang,
jessica was waiting, her eyes about to bug out of
their sockets. over her arm, bless her, was my jacket.

"hey, jessica," i said when we were a few feet away.
"thanks for remembering." she handed me my jacket
without speaking.

"good morning, jessica," edward said politely. it
wasn't really his fault that his voice was so
irresistible. or what his eyes were capable of.

213 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"er hi." she shifted her wide eyes to me, trying to
gather her jumbled thoughts. "i guess i'll see you in
trig." she gave me a meaningful look, and i
suppressed a sigh. what on earth was i going to tell
her?

"yeah, i'll see you then."

she walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her
shoulder at us.

"what are you going to tell her?" edward murmured.

"hey, i thought you couldn't read my mind!" i hissed.

"i can't," he said, startled. then understanding
brightened his eyes.

"however, i can read hers - she'll be waiting to
ambush you in class." i groaned as i pulled off his
jacket and handed it to him, replacing it with my own.
he folded it over his arm.

"so what are you going to tell her?"

"a little help?" i pleaded. "what does she want to
know?" he shook his head, grinning wickedly. "that's
not fair."

"no, you not sharing what you know - now that's not
fair." he deliberated for a moment as we walked. we
stopped outside the door to my first class.

"she wants to know if we're secretly dating. and she
wants to know how you feel about me," he finally
said.

214 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yikes. what should i say?" i tried to keep my
expression very innocent. people were passing us on
their way to class, probably staring, but i was barely
aware of them.

"hmmm." he paused to catch a stray lock of hair that
was escaping the twist on my neck and wound it back
into place. my heart spluttered hyperactively. "i
suppose you could say yes to the first if you don't
mind - it's easier than any other explanation."

"i don't mind," i said in a faint voice.

"and as for her other question well, i'll be listening
to hear the answer to that one myself." one side of his
mouth pulled up into my favorite uneven smile. i
couldn't catch my breath soon enough to respond to
that remark. he turned and walked away.

"i'll see you at lunch," he called over his shoulder.
three people walking in the door stopped to stare at
me.

i hurried into class, flushed and irritated. he was
such a cheater. now i was even more worried about
what i was going to say to jessica. i sat in my usual
seat, slamming my bag down in aggravation.

"morning, bella," mike said from the seat next to me. i
looked up to see an odd, almost resigned look on his
face. "how was port angeles?"

"it was" there was no honest way to sum it up.
"great," i finished lamely. "jessica got a really cute
dress."

215 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"did she say anything about monday night?" he
asked, his eyes brightening. i smiled at the turn the
conversation had taken.

"she said she had a really good time," i assured him.

"she did?" he said eagerly.

"most definitely."

mr. mason called the class to order then, asking us to
turn in our papers. english and then government
passed in a blur, while i worried about how to explain
things to jessica and agonized over whether edward
would really be listening to what i said through the
medium of jess's thoughts. how very inconvenient
his little talent could be - when it wasn't saving my
life.

the fog had almost dissolved by the end of the second
hour, but the day was still dark with low, oppressing
clouds. i smiled up at the sky. edward was right, of
course. when i walked into trig jessica was sitting in
the back row, nearly bouncing off her seat in
agitation. i reluctantly went to sit by her, trying to
convince myself it would be better to get it over with
as soon as possible.

"tell me everything!" she commanded before i was in
the seat.

"what do you want to know?" i hedged.

"what happened last night?"

216 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"he bought me dinner, and then he drove me home."
she glared at me, her expression stiff with skepticism.
"how did you get home so fast?"

"he drives like a maniac. it was terrifying." i hoped he
heard that.

"was it like a date - did you tell him to meet you
there?" i hadn't thought of that. "no - i was very
surprised to see him there." her lips puckered in
disappointment at the transparent honesty in my
voice.

"but he picked you up for school today?" she probed.

"yes - that was a surprise, too. he noticed i didn't
have a jacket last night," i explained.

"so are you going out again?"

"he offered to drive me to seattle saturday because
he thinks toy truck isn't up to it - does that count?"

"yes." she nodded.

"well, then, yes."

"w-o-w." she exaggerated the word into three
syllables. "edward cullen."

"i know," i agreed. "wow" didn't even cover it.

"wait!" her hands flew up, palms toward me like she
was stopping traffic.

"has he kissed you?"

"no," i mumbled. "it's not like that." she looked
disappointed. i'm sure i did, too.
217 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"do you think saturday ?" she raised her eyebrows.

"i really doubt it." the discontent in my voice was
poorly disguised.

"what did you talk about?" she pushed for more
information in a whisper. class had started but mr.
varner wasn't paying close attention and we weren't
the only ones still talking.

"i don't know, jess, lots of stuff," i whispered back.
"we talked about the english essay a little." a very,
very little. i think he mentioned it in passing.

"please, bella," she begged. "give me some details."

"well okay, i've got one. you should have seen the
waitress flirting with him - it was over the top. but
he didn't pay any attention to her at all." let him
make what he could of that.

"that's a good sign," she nodded. "was she pretty?"

"very - and probably nineteen or twenty."

"even better. he must like you."

"i think so, but it's hard to tell. he's always so
cryptic," i threw in for his benefit, sighing.

"i don't know how you're brave enough to be alone
with him," she breathed.

"why?" i was shocked, but she didn't understand my
reaction.

"he's so intimidating. i wouldn't know what to say
to him." she made a face, probably remembering this

218 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
morning or last night, when he'd turned the
overwhelming force of his eyes on her.

"i do have some trouble with incoherency when i'm
around him," i admitted.

"oh well. he is unbelievably gorgeous." jessica
shrugged as if this excused any flaws. which, in her
book, it probably did.

"there's a lot more to him than that."

"really? like what?"

i wished i had let it go. almost as much as i was
hoping he'd been kidding about listening in.

"i can't explain it right but he's even more
unbelievable behind the face." the vampire who
wanted to be good - who ran around saving people's
lives so he wouldn't be a monster i stared toward
the front of the room.

"is that possible?" she giggled.

i ignored her, trying to look like i was paying
attention to mr. varner.

"so you like him, then?" she wasn't about to give up.

"yes," i said curtly.

"i mean, do you really like him?" she urged.

"yes," i said again, blushing. i hoped that detail
wouldn't register in her thoughts.

she'd had enough with the single syllable answers.
"how much do you like him?"
219 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"too much," i whispered back. "more than he likes
me. but i don't see how i can help that." i sighed, one
blush blending into the next. then, thankfully, mr.
varner called on jessica for an answer. she didn't get
a chance to start on the subject again during class,
and as soon as the bell rang, i took evasive action.

"in english, mike asked me if you said anything about
monday night," i told her.

"you're kidding! what did you say?!" she gasped,
completely sidetracked.

"i told him you said you had a lot of fun - he looked
pleased."

"tell me exactly what he said, and your exact
answer!" we spent the rest of the walk dissecting
sentence structures and most of spanish on a minute
description of mike's facial expressions. i wouldn't
have helped draw it out for as long as i did if i wasn't
worried about the subject returning to me.

and then the bell rang for lunch. as i jumped up out
of my seat, shoving my books roughly in my bag, my
uplifted expression must have tipped jessica off.

"you're not sitting with us today, are you?" she
guessed.

"i don't think so." i couldn't be sure that he wouldn't
disappear inconveniently again.

but outside the door to our spanish class, leaning
against the wall -

220 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
looking more like a greek god than anyone had a
right to - edward was waiting for me. jessica took
one look, rolled her eyes, and departed.

"see you later, bella." her voice was thick with
implications. i might have to turn off the ringer on the
phone.

"hello." his voice was amused and irritated at the
same time. he had been listening, it was obvious.

"hi."

i couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't
speak - biding his time, i presumed - so it was a
quiet walk to the cafeteria. walking with edward
through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot like
my first day here; everyone stared.

he led the way into the line, still not speaking, though
his eyes returned to my face every few seconds, their
expression speculative. it seemed to me that irritation
was winning out over amusement as the dominant
emotion in his face. i fidgeted nervously with the
zipper on my jacket.

he stepped up to the counter and filled a tray with
food.

"what are you doing?" i objected. "you're not getting
all that for me?" he shook his head, stepping forward
to buy the food.

"half is for me, of course."

i raised one eyebrow.

221 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he led the way to the same place we'd sat that one
time before. from the other end of the long table, a
group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we sat
across from each other. edward seemed oblivious.

"take whatever you want," he said, pushing the tray
toward me.

"i'm curious," i said as i picked up an apple, turning
it around in my hands, "what would you do if
someone dared you to eat food?"

"you're always curious." he grimaced, shaking his
head. he glared at me, holding my eyes as he lifted
the slice of pizza off the tray, and deliberately bit off a
mouthful, chewed quickly, and then swallowed. i
watched, eyes wide.

"if someone dared you to eat dirt, you could, couldn't
you?" he asked condescendingly.

i wrinkled my nose. "i did once on a dare," i
admitted. "it wasn't so bad."

he laughed. "i suppose i'm not surprised." something
over my shoulder seemed to catch his attention.

"jessica's analyzing everything i do - she'll break it
down for you later." he pushed the rest of the pizza
toward me. the mention of jessica brought a hint of
his former irritation back to his features. i put down
the apple and took a bite of the pizza, looking away,
knowing he was about to start.

"so the waitress was pretty, was she?" he asked
casually.

222 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you really didn't notice?"

"no. i wasn't paying attention. i had a lot on my
mind."

"poor girl." i could afford to be generous now.

"something you said to jessica well, it bothers me."
he refused to be distracted. his voice was husky, and
he glanced up from under his lashes with troubled
eyes.

"i'm not surprised you heard something you didn't
like. you know what they say about eavesdropners," i
reminded him.

"i warned you i would be listening."

"and i warned you that you didn't want to know
everything i was thinking."

"you did," he agreed, but his voice was still rough.
"you aren't precisely right, though. i do want to know
what you're thinking -

everything. i just wish that you wouldn't be
thinking some things." i scowled. "that's quite a
distinction."

"but that's not really the point at the moment."

"then what is?" we were inclined toward each other
across the table now. he had his large white hands
folded under his chin; i leaned forward, my right
hand cupped around my neck. i had to remind myself
that we were in a crowded lunchroom, with probably

223 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
many curious eyes on us. it was too easy to get
wrapped up in our own private, tense little bubble.

"do you truly believe that you care more for me than i
do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me as he
spoke, his dark golden eyes piercing. i tried to
remember how to exhale. i had to look away before it
came back to me.

"you're doing it again," i muttered.

his eyes opened wide with surprise. "what?"

"dazzling me," i admitted, trying to concentrate as i
looked back at him.

"oh." he frowned.

"it's not your fault," i sighed. "you can't help it."

"are you going to answer the question?"

i looked down. "yes."

"yes, you are going to answer, or yes, you really think
that?" he was irritated again.

"yes, i really think that." i kept my eyes down on the
table, my eyes tracing the pattern of the faux wood
grains printed on the laminate. the silence dragged
on. i stubbornly refused to be the first to break it this
time, fighting hard against the temptation to peek at
his expression. finally he spoke, voice velvet soft.
"you're wrong." i glanced up to see that his eyes were
gentle.

224 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you can't know that," i disagreed in a whisper. i
shook my head in doubt, though my heart throbbed
at his words and i wanted so badly to believe them.

"what makes you think so?" his liquid topaz eyes
were penetrating -

trying futilely, i assumed, to lift the truth straight
from my mind. i stared back, struggling to think
clearly in spite of his face, to find some way to
explain. as i searched for the words, i could see him
getting impatient; frustrated by my silence, he started
to scowl. i lifted my hand from my neck, and held up
one finger.

"let me think," i insisted. his expression cleared, now
that he was satisfied that i was planning to answer. i
dropped my hand to the table, moving my left hand so
that my palms were pressed together. i stared at my
hands, twisting and untwisting my fingers, as i finally
spoke.

"well, aside from the obvious, sometimes" i
hesitated. "i can't be sure

- i don't know how to read minds - but sometimes
it seems like you're trying to say goodbye when you're
saying something else." that was the best i could sum
up the sensation of anguish that his words triggered
in me at times.

"perceptive," he whispered. and there was the
anguish again, surfacing as he confirmed my fear.
"that's exactly why you're wrong, though," he began
to explain, but then his eyes narrowed. "what do you
mean, 'the obvious'?"
225 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"well, look at me," i said, unnecessarily as he was
already staring. "i'm absolutely ordinary - well,
except for bad things like all the near-death
experiences and being so clumsy that i'm almost
disabled. and look at you." i waved my hand toward
him and all his bewildering perfection. his brow
creased angrily for a moment, then smoothed as his
eyes took on a knowing look. "you don't see yourself
very clearly, you know. i'll admit you're dead-on about
the bad things," he chuckled blackly, "but you didn't
hear what every human male in this school was
thinking on your first day."

i blinked, astonished. "i don't believe it" i mumbled
to myself.

"trust me just this once - you are the opposite of
ordinary." my embarrassment was much stronger
than my pleasure at the look that came into his eyes
when he said this. i quickly reminded him of my
original argument.

"but i'm not saying goodbye," i pointed out.

"don't you see? that's what proves me right. i care
the most, because if i can do it" - he shook his head,
seeming to struggle with the thought -

"if leaving is the right thing to do, then i'll hurt myself
to keep from hurting you, to keep you safe."

i glared. "and you don't think i would do the same?"

"you'd never have to make the choice."

abruptly, his unpredictable mood shifted again; a
mischievous, devastating smile rearranged his
226 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
features. "of course, keeping you safe is beginning to
feel like a full-time occupation that requires my
constant presence."

"no one has tried to do away with me today," i
reminded him, grateful for the lighter subject. i didn't
want him to talk about goodbyes anymore. if i had to,
i supposed i could purposefully put myself in danger
to keep him close i banished that thought before his
quick eyes read it on my face. that idea would
definitely get me in trouble.

"yet," he added.

"yet," i agreed; i would have argued, but now i wanted
him to be expecting disasters.

"i have another question for you." his face was still
casual.

"shoot."

"do you really need to go to seattle this saturday, or
was that just an excuse to get out of saying no to all
your admirers?" i made a face at the memory. "you
know, i haven't forgiven you for the tyler thing yet," i
warned him. "it's your fault that he's deluded himself
into thinking i'm going to prom with him."

"oh, he would have found a chance to ask you
without me - i just really wanted to watch your face,"
he chuckled, i would have been angrier if his laughter
wasn't so fascinating. "if i'd asked you, would you
have turned me down?" he asked, still laughing to
himself.

227 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"probably not," i admitted. "but i would have canceled
later - faked an illness or a sprained ankle."

he was puzzled. "why would you do that?"

i shook my head sadly. "you've never seen me in
gym, i guess, but i would have thought you would
understand."

"are you referring to the fact that you can't walk
across a flat, stable surface without finding
something to trip over?"

"obviously."

"that wouldn't be a problem." he was very confident.
"it's all in the leading." he could see that i was about
to protest, and he cut me off.

"but you never told me - are you resolved on going to
seattle, or do you mind if we do something different?"

as long as the "we" part was in, i didn't care about
anything else.

"i'm open to alternatives," i allowed. "but i do have a
favor to ask." he looked wary, as he always did when i
asked an open-ended question.

"what?"

"can i drive?"

he frowned. "why?"

"well, mostly because when i told charlie i was going
to seattle, he specifically asked if i was going alone
and, at the time, i was. if he asked again, i probably

228 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
wouldn't lie, but i don't think he will ask again, and
leaving my truck at home would just bring up the
subject unnecessarily. and also, because your driving
frightens me." he rolled his eyes. "of all the things
about me that could frighten you, you worry about
my driving." he shook his head in disgust, but then
his eyes were serious again. "won't you want to tell
your father that you're spending the day with me?"
there was an undercurrent to his question that i
didn't understand.

"with charlie, less is always more." i was definite
about that. "where are we going, anyway?"

"the weather will be nice, so i'll be staying out of the
public eye and you can stay with me, if you'd like
to." again, he was leaving the choice up to me.

"and you'll show me what you meant, about the sun?"
i asked, excited by the idea of unraveling another of
the unknowns.

"yes." he smiled, and then paused. "but if you don't
want to be alone with me, i'd still rather you didn't
go to seattle by yourself. i shudder to think of the
trouble you could find in a city that size." i was
miffed. "phoenix is three times bigger than seattle -
just in population. in physical size -"

"but apparently," he interrupted me, "your number
wasn't up in phoenix. so i'd rather you stayed near
me." his eyes did that unfair smoldering thing again.

i couldn't argue, with the eyes or the motivation, and
it was a moot point anyway. "as it happens, i don't
mind being alone with you."
229 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i know," he sighed, brooding. "you should tell
charlie, though."

"why in the world would i do that?"

his eyes were suddenly fierce. "to give me some small
incentive to bring you back."

i gulped. but, after a moment of thought, i was sure.
"i think i'll take my chances."

he exhaled angrily, and looked away.

"let's talk about something else," i suggested.

"what do you want to talk about?" he asked. he was
still annoyed. i glanced around us, making sure we
were well out of anyone's hearing. as i cast my eyes
around the room, i caught the eyes of his sister, alice,
staring at me. the others were looking at edward. i
looked away swiftly, back to him, and i. asked the
first thing that came to mind.

"why did you go to that goat rocks place last
weekend to hunt? charlie said it wasn't a good
place to hike, because of bears." he stared at me as if
i was missing something very obvious.

"bears?" i gasped, and he smirked. "you know, bears
are not in season," i added sternly, to hide my shock.

"if you read carefully, the laws only cover hunting
with weapons," he informed me.

he watched my face with enjoyment as that slowly
sank in.

"bears?" i repeated with difficulty.
230 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"grizzly is emmett's favorite." his voice was still
offhand, but his eyes were scrutinizing my reaction. i
tried to pull myself together.

"hmmm," i said, taking another bite of pizza as an
excuse to look down. i chewed slowly, and then took a
long drink of coke without looking up.

"so," i said after a moment, finally meeting his now-
anxious gaze.

"what's your favorite?"

he raised an eyebrow and the corners of his mouth
turned down in disapproval. "mountain lion."

"ah," i said in a politely disinterested tone, looking for
my soda again.

"of course," he said, and his tone mirrored mine, "we
have to be careful not to impact the environment with
injudicious hunting. we try to focus on areas with an
overpopulation of predators - ranging as far away as
we need. there's always plenty of deer and elk here,
and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" he smiled
teasingly.

"where indeed," i murmured around another bite of
pizza.

"early spring is emmett's favorite bear season -
they're just coming out of hibernation, so they're more
irritable." he smiled at some remembered joke.

"nothing more fun than an irritated grizzly bear," i
agreed, nodding. he snickered, shaking his head.
"tell me what you're really thinking, please."
231 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm trying to picture it - but i can't," i admitted.
"how do you hunt a bear without weapons?"

"oh, we have weapons." he flashed his bright teeth in
a brief, threatening smile. i fought back a shiver
before it could expose me.

"just not the kind they consider when writing
hunting laws. if you've ever seen a bear attack on
television, you should be able to visualize emmett
hunting."

i couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my
spine. i peeked across the cafeteria toward emmett,
grateful that he wasn't looking my way. the thick
bands of muscle that wrapped his arms and torso
were somehow even more menacing now.

edward followed my gaze and chuckled. i stared at
him, unnerved.

"are you like a bear, too?" i asked in a low voice.

"more like the lion, or so they tell me," he said lightly.
"perhaps our preferences are indicative."

i tried to smile. "perhaps," i repeated. but my mind
was filled with opposing images that i couldn't merge
together. "is that something i might get to see?"

"absolutely not!" his face turned even whiter than
usual, and his eyes were suddenly furious. i leaned
back, stunned and - though i'd never admit it to him
- frightened by his reaction. he leaned back as well,
folding his arms across his chest.

232 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"too scary for me?" i asked when i could control my
voice again.

"if that were it, i would take you out tonight," he said,
his voice cutting. "you need a healthy dose of fear.
nothing could be more beneficial for you."

"then why?" i pressed, trying to ignore his angry
expression. he glared at me for a long minute.

"later," he finally said. he was on his feet in one lithe
movement.

"we're going to be late."

i glanced around, startled to see that he was right
and the cafeteria was nearly vacant. when i was with
him, the time and the place were such a muddled
blur that i completely lost track of both. i jumped up,
grabbing my bag from the back of my chair.

"later, then," i agreed. i wouldn't forget.

233 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 complications

everyone watched us as we walked together to our lab
table. i noticed that he no longer angled the chair to
sit as far from me as the desk would allow. instead,
he sat quite close beside me, our arms almost
touching.

mr. banner backed into the room then - what
superb timing the man had -

pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a
heavy-looking, outdated tv and vcr. a movie day -
the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible.

mr. banner shoved the tape into the reluctant vcr
and walked to the wall to turn off the lights.

and then, as the room went black, i was suddenly
hyperaware that edward was sitting less than an inch
from me. i was stunned by the unexpected electricity
that flowed through me, amazed that it was possible
to be more aware of him than i already was. a crazy
impulse to reach over and touch him, to stroke his
perfect face just once in the darkness, nearly
overwhelmed me. i crossed my arms tightly across my
chest, my hands balling into fists. i was losing my
mind.

the opening credits began, lighting the room by a
token amount. my eyes, of their own accord, flickered
to him. i smiled sheepishly as i realized his posture
was identical to mine, fists clenched under his arms,

234 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
right down to the eyes, peering sideways at me. he
grinned back, his eyes somehow managing to
smolder, even in the dark. i looked away before i
could start hyperventilating. it was absolutely
ridiculous that i should feel dizzy.

the hour seemed very long. i couldn't concentrate on
the movie - i didn't even know what subject it was
on. i tried unsuccessfully to relax, but the electric
current that seemed to be originating from
somewhere in his body never slackened. occasionally
i would permit myself a quick glance in his direction,
but he never seemed to relax, either. the
overpowering craving to touch him also refused to
fade, and i crushed my fists safely against my ribs
until my fingers were aching with the effort. i
breathed a sigh of relief when mr. banner flicked the
lights back on at the end of class, and stretched my
arms out in front of me, flexing my stiff fingers.
edward chuckled beside me.

"well, that was interesting," he murmured. his voice
was dark and his eyes were cautious.

"umm," was all i was able to respond.

"shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly.

i almost groaned. time for gym. i stood with care,
worried my balance might have been affected by the
strange new intensity between us. he walked me to
my next class in silence and paused at the door; i
turned to say goodbye. his face startled me - his
expression was torn, almost pained, and so fiercely
beautiful that the ache to touch him flared as strong
as before. my goodbye stuck in my throat.
235 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he raised his hand, hesitant, conflict raging in his
eyes, and then swiftly brushed the length of my
cheekbone with his fingertips. his skin was as icy as
ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin was
alarmingly warm - like i'd been burned, but didn't
feel the pain of it yet.

he turned without a word and strode quickly away
from me. i walked into the gym, lightheaded and
wobbly. i drifted to the locker room, changing in a
trancelike state, only vaguely aware that there were
other people surrounding me. reality didn't fully set
in until i was handed a racket. it wasn't heavy, yet it
felt very unsafe in my hand. i could see a few of the
other kids in class eyeing me furtively. coach clapp
ordered us to pair up into teams.

mercifully, some vestiges of mike's chivalry still
survived; he came to stand beside me.

"do you want to be a team?"

"thanks, mike - you don't have to do this, you
know." i grimaced apologetically.

"don't worry, i'll keep out of your way." he grinned.
sometimes it was so easy to like mike.

it didn't go smoothly. i somehow managed to hit
myself in the head with my racket and clip mike's
shoulder on the same swing. i spent the rest of the
hour in the back corner of the court, the racket held
safely behind my back. despite being handicapped by
me, mike was pretty good; he won three games out of
four singlehandedly. he gave me an unearned high

236 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
five when the coach finally blew the whistle ending
class.

"so," he said as we walked off the court.

"so what?"

"you and cullen, huh?" he asked, his tone rebellious.
my previous feeling of affection disappeared.

"that's none of your business, mike," i warned,
internally cursing jessica straight to the fiery pits of
hades.

"i don't like it," he muttered anyway.

"you don't have to," i snapped.

"he looks at you like like you're something to eat,"
he continued, ignoring me.

i choked back the hysteria that threatened to explode,
but a small giggle managed to get out despite my
efforts. he glowered at me. i waved and fled to the
locker room.

i dressed quickly, something stronger than butterflies
battering recklessly against the walls of my stomach,
my argument with mike already a distant memory. i
was wondering if edward would be waiting, or if i
should meet him at his car. what if his family was
there? i felt a wave of real terror. did they know that i
knew? was i supposed to know that they knew that i
knew, or not?

by the time i walked out of the gym, i had just about
decided to walk straight home without even looking

237 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
toward the parking lot. but my worries were
unnecessary. edward was waiting, leaning casually
against the side of the gym, his breathtaking face
untroubled now. as i walked to his side, i felt a
peculiar sense of release.

"hi," i breathed, smiling hugely.

"hello." his answering smile was brilliant. "how was
gym?" my face fell a tiny bit. "fine," i lied.

"really?" he was unconvinced. his eyes shifted their
focus slightly, looking over my shoulder and
narrowing. i glanced behind me to see mike's back as
he walked away.

"what?" i demanded.

his eyes slid back to mine, still tight. "newton's
getting on my nerves."

"you weren't listening again?" i was horror-struck. all
traces of my sudden good humor vanished.

"how's your head?" he asked innocently.

"you're unbelievable!" i turned, stomping away in the
general direction of the parking lot, though i hadn't
ruled out walking at this point. he kept up with me
easily.

"you were the one who mentioned how i'd never seen
you in gym - it made me curious." he didn't sound
repentant, so i ignored him. we walked in silence - a
furious, embarrassed silence on my part - to his car.
but i had to stop a few steps away - a crowd of
people, all boys, were surrounding it.
238 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
then i realized they weren't surrounding the volvo,
they were actually circled around rosalie's red
convertible, unmistakable lust in their eyes. none of
them even looked up as edward slid between them to
open his door. i climbed quickly in the passenger
side, also unnoticed.

"ostentatious," he muttered.

"what kind of car is that?" i asked.

"an m3."

"i don't speak car and driver."

"it's a bmw." he rolled his eyes, not looking at me,
trying to back out without running over the car
enthusiasts.

i nodded - i'd heard of that one.

"are you still angry?" he asked as he carefully
maneuvered his way out.

"definitely."

he sighed. "will you forgive me if i apologize?"

"maybe if you mean it. and if you promise not to do
it again," i insisted.

his eyes were suddenly shrewd. "how about if i mean
it, and i agree to let you drive saturday?" he
countered my conditions. i considered, and decided it
was probably the best offer i would get.

"deal," i agreed.

239 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"then i'm very sorry i upset you." his eyes burned
with sincerity for a protracted moment - playing
havoc with the rhythm of my heart - and then
turned playful. "and i'll be on your doorstep bright
and early saturday morning."

"um, it doesn't help with the charlie situation if an
unexplained volvo is left in the driveway."

his smile was condescending now. "i wasn't intending
to bring a car."

"how -"

he cut me off. "don't worry about it. i'll be there, no
car." i let it go. i had a more pressing question.

"is it later yet?" i asked significantly.

he frowned. "i supposed it is later."

i kept my expression polite as i waited.

he stopped the car. i looked up, surprised - of
course we were already at charlie's house, parked
behind the truck. it was easier to ride with him if i
only looked when it was over. when i looked back at
him, he was staring at me, measuring with his eyes.

"and you still want to know why you can't see me
hunt?" he seemed solemn, but i thought i saw a trace
of humor deep in his eyes.

"well," i clarified, "i was mostly wondering about your
reaction."

"did i frighten you?" yes, there was definitely humor
there.
240 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no," i lied. he didn't buy it.

"i apologize for scaring you," he persisted with a slight
smile, but then all evidence of teasing disappeared. "it
was just the very thought of you being there while
we hunted." his jaw tightened.

"that would be bad?"

he spoke from between clenched teeth. "extremely."

"because ?"

he took a deep breath and stared through the
windshield at the thick, rolling clouds that seemed to
press down, almost within reach.

"when we hunt," he spoke slowly, unwillingly, "we
give ourselves over to our senses govern less with
our minds. especially our sense of smell. if you were
anywhere near me when i lost control that way" he
shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy
clouds.

i kept my expression firmly under control, expecting
the swift flash of his eyes to judge my reaction that
soon followed. my face gave nothing away.

but our eyes held, and the silence deepened - and
changed. flickers of the electricity i'd felt this
afternoon began to charge the atmosphere as he
gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. it wasn't until my
head started to swim that i realized i wasn't
breathing. when i drew in a jagged breath, breaking
the stillness, he closed his eyes.

241 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bella, i think you should go inside now." his low
voice was rough, his eyes on the clouds again.

i opened the door, and the arctic draft that burst into
the car helped clear my head. afraid i might stumble
in my woozy state, i stepped carefully out of the car
and shut the door behind me without looking back.
the whir of the automatic window unrolling made me
turn.

"oh, bella?" he called after me, his voice more even.
he leaned toward the open window with a faint smile
on his lips.

"yes?"

"tomorrow it's my turn."

"your turn to what?"

he smiled wider, flashing his gleaming teeth. "ask the
questions." and then he was gone, the car speeding
down the street and disappearing around the corner
before i could even collect my thoughts. i smiled as i
walked to the house. it was clear he was planning to
see me tomorrow, if nothing else.

that night edward starred in my dreams, as usual.
however, the climate of my unconsciousness had
changed. it thrilled with the same electricity that had
charged the afternoon, and i tossed and turned
restlessly, waking often. it was only in the early hours
of the morning that i finally sank into an exhausted,
dreamless sleep.

when i woke i was still tired, but edgy as well. i
pulled on my brown turtleneck and the inescapable
242 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
jeans, sighing as i daydreamed of spaghetti straps
and shorts. breakfast was the usual, quiet event i
expected. charlie fried eggs for himself; i had my bowl
of cereal. i wondered if he had forgotten about this
saturday. he answered my unspoken question as he
stood up to take his plate to the sink.

"about this saturday" he began, walking across the
kitchen and turning on the faucet.

i cringed. "yes, dad?"

"are you still set on going to seattle?" he asked.

"that was the plan." i grimaced, wishing he hadn't
brought it up so i wouldn't have to compose careful
half-truths.

he squeezed some dish soap onto his plate and
swirled it around with the brush. "and you're sure
you can't make it back in time for the dance?"

"i'm not going to the dance, dad." i glared.

"didn't anyone ask you?" he asked, trying to hide his
concern by focusing on rinsing the plate.

i sidestepped the minefield. "it's a girl's choice."

"oh." he frowned as he dried his plate.

i sympathized with him. it must be a hard thing, to be
a father; living in fear that your daughter would meet
a boy she liked, but also having to worry if she didn't.
how ghastly it would be, i thought, shuddering, if
charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactly what
i did like. charlie left then, with a goodbye wave, and

243 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i went upstairs to brush my teeth and gather my
books. when i heard the cruiser pull away, i could
only wait a few seconds before i had to peek out of my
window. the silver car was already there, waiting in
charlie's spot on the driveway. i bounded down the
stairs and out the front door, wondering how long this
bizarre routine would continue. i never wanted it to
end. he waited in the car, not appearing to watch as i
shut the door behind me without bothering to lock
the dead-bolt. i walked to the car, pausing shyly
before opening the door and stepping in. he was
smiling, relaxed -

and, as usual, perfect and beautiful to an
excruciating degree.

"good morning." his voice was silky. "how are you
today?" his eyes roamed over my face, as if his
question was something more than simple courtesy.

"good, thank you." i was always good - much more
than good - when i was near him.

his gaze lingered on the circles under my eyes. "you
look tired."

"i couldn't sleep," i confessed, automatically swinging
my hair around my shoulder to provide some
measure of cover.

"neither could i," he teased as he started the engine. i
was becoming used to the quiet purr. i was sure the
roar of my truck would scare me, whenever i got to
drive it again.

244 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i laughed. "i guess that's right. i suppose i slept just a
little bit more than you did."

"i'd wager you did."

"so what did you do last night?" i asked.

he chuckled. "not a chance. it's my day to ask
questions."

"oh, that's right. what do you want to know?" my
forehead creased. i couldn't imagine anything about
me that could be in any way interesting to him.

"what's your favorite color?" he asked, his face grave.
i rolled my eyes. "it changes from day to day."

"what's your favorite color today?" he was still
solemn.

"probably brown." i tended to dress according to my
mood. he snorted, dropping his serious expression.
"brown?" he asked skeptically.

"sure. brown is warm. i miss brown. everything
that's supposed to be brown - tree trunks, rocks,
dirt - is all covered up with squashy green stuff
here," i complained.

he seemed fascinated by my little rant. he considered
for a moment, staring into my eyes.

"you're right," he decided, serious again. "brown is
warm." he reached over, swiftly, but somehow still
hesitantly, to sweep my hair back behind my
shoulder.

245 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
we were at the school by now. he turned back to me
as he pulled into a parking space.

"what music is in your cd player right now?" he
asked, his face as somber as if he'd asked for a
murder confession.

i realized i'd never removed the cd phil had given me.
when i said the name of the band, he smiled
crookedly, a peculiar expression in his eyes. he
flipped open a compartment under his car's cd
player, pulled out one of thirty or so cds that were
jammed into the small space, and handed it to me,

"debussy to this?" he raised an eyebrow.

it was the same cd. i examined the familiar cover art,
keeping my eyes down.

it continued like that for the rest of the day. while he
walked me to english, when he met me after spanish,
all through the lunch hour, he questioned me
relentlessly about every insignificant detail of my
existence. movies i'd liked and hated, the few places
i'd been and the many places i wanted to go, and
books - endlessly books.

i couldn't remember the last time i'd talked so much.
more often than not, i felt self-conscious, certain i
must be boring him. but the absolute absorption of
his face, and his never-ending stream of questions,
compelled me to continue. mostly his questions were
easy, only a very few triggering my easy blushes. but
when i did flush, it brought on a whole new round of
questions.

246 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
such as the time he asked my favorite gemstone, and
i blurted out topaz before thinking. he'd been flinging
questions at me with such speed that i felt like i was
taking one of those psychiatric tests where you
answer with the first word that comes to mind. i was
sure he would have continued down whatever mental
list he was following, except for the blush. my face
reddened because, until very recently, my favorite
gemstone was garnet. it was impossible, while staring
back into his topaz eyes, not to remember the reason
for the switch. and, naturally, he wouldn't rest until
i'd admitted why i was embarrassed.

"tell me," he finally commanded after persuasion
failed - failed only because i kept my eyes safely
away from his face.

"it's the color of your eyes today," i sighed,
surrendering, staring down at my hands as i fiddled
with a piece of my hair. "i suppose if you asked me in
two weeks i'd say onyx." i'd given more information
than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and i
worried it would provoke the strange anger that flared
whenever i slipped and revealed too clearly how
obsessed i was.

but his pause was very short.

"what kinds of flowers do you prefer?" he fired off. i
sighed in relief, and continued with the
psychoanalysis. biology was a complication again.
edward had continued with his quizzing up until mr.
banner entered the room, dragging the audiovisual
frame again. as the teacher approached the light
switch, i noticed edward slide his chair slightly

247 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
farther away from mine. it didn't help. as soon as the
room was dark, there was the same electric spark, the
same restless craving to stretch my hand across the
short space and touch his cold skin, as yesterday.

i leaned forward on the table, resting my chin on my
folded arms, my hidden fingers gripping the table's
edge as i fought to ignore the irrational longing that
unsettled me. i didn't look at him, afraid that if he
was looking at me, it would only make self-control
that much harder. i sincerely tried to watch the
movie, but at the end of the hour i had no idea what
i'd just seen. i sighed in relief again when mr. banner
turned the lights on, finally glancing at edward; he
was looking at me, his eyes ambivalent.

he rose in silence and then stood still, waiting for me.
we walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday.
and, also like yesterday, he touched my face
wordlessly - this time with the back of his cool hand,
stroking once from my temple to my jaw - before he
turned and walked away. gym passed quickly as i
watched mike's one-man badminton show. he didn't
speak to me today, either in response to my vacant
expression or because he was still angry about our
squabble yesterday. somewhere, in a corner of my
mind, i felt bad about that. but i couldn't concentrate
on him. i hurried to change afterward, ill at ease,
knowing the faster i moved, the sooner i would be
with edward. the pressure made me more clumsy
than usual, but eventually i made it out the door,
feeling the same release when i saw him standing
there, a wide smile automatically spreading across my

248 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
face. he smiled in reaction before launching into more
cross-examination.

his questions were different now, though, not as
easily answered. he wanted to know what i missed
about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he
wasn't familiar with. we sat in front of charlie's
house for hours, as the sky darkened and rain
plummeted around us in a sudden deluge.

i tried to describe impossible things like the scent of
creosote -

bitter, slightly resinous, but still pleasant - the high,
keening sound of the cicadas in july, the feathery
barrenness of the trees, the very size of the sky,
extending white-blue from horizon to horizon, barely
interrupted by the low mountains covered with purple
volcanic rock. the hardest thing to explain was why it
was so beautiful to me - to justify a beauty that
didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that
often looked half dead, a beauty that had more to do
with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow
bowls of valleys between the craggy hills, and the way
they held on to the sun. i found myself using my
hands as i tried to describe it to him.

his quiet, probing questions kept me talking freely,
forgetting, in the dim light of the storm, to be
embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation.
finally, when i had finished detailing my cluttered
room at home, he paused instead of responding with
another question.

"are you finished?" i asked in relief.

249 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"not even close - but your father will be home soon."

"charlie!" i suddenly recalled his existence, and
sighed. i looked out at the rain-darkened sky, but it
gave nothing away. "how late is it?" i wondered out
loud as i glanced at the clock. i was surprised by the
time

- charlie would be driving home now.

"it's twilight," edward murmured, looking at the
western horizon, obscured as it was with clouds. his
voice was thoughtful, as if his mind were somewhere
far away. i stared at him as he gazed unseeingly out
the windshield.

i was still staring when his eyes suddenly shifted
back to mine.

"it's the safest time of day for us," he said, answering
the unspoken question in my eyes. "the easiest time.
but also the saddest, in a way

the end of another day, the return of the night.
darkness is so predictable, don't you think?" he
smiled wistfully.

"i like the night. without the dark, we'd never see the
stars." i frowned. "not that you see them here much."

he laughed, and the mood abruptly lightened.

"charlie will be here in a few minutes. so, unless you
want to tell him that you'll be with me saturday" he
raised one eyebrow.

250 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"thanks, but no thanks." i gathered my books,
realizing i was stiff from sitting still so long. "so is it
my turn tomorrow, then?"

"certainly not!" his face was teasingly outraged. "i
told you i wasn't done, didn't i?"

"what more is there?"

"you'll find out tomorrow." he reached across to open
my door for me, and his sudden proximity sent my
heart into frenzied palpitations. but his hand froze on
the handle.

"not good," he muttered.

"what is it?" i was surprised to see that his jaw was
clenched, his eyes disturbed.

he glanced at me for a brief second. "another
complication," he said glumly.

he flung the door open in one swift movement, and
then moved, almost cringed, swiftly away from me.

the flash of headlights through the rain caught my
attention as a dark car pulled up to the curb just a
few feet away, facing us.

"charlie's around the corner," he warned, staring
through the downpour at the other vehicle.

i hopped out at once, despite my confusion and
curiosity. the rain was louder as it glanced off my
jacket.

i tried to make out the shapes in the front seat of the
other car, but it was too dark. i could see edward
251 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
illuminated in the glare of the new car's headlights;
he was still staring ahead, his gaze locked on
something or someone i couldn't see. his expression
was a strange mix of frustration and defiance.

then he revved the engine, and the tires squealed
against the wet pavement. the volvo was out of sight
in seconds.

"hey, bella," called a familiar, husky voice from the
driver's side of the little black car.

"jacob?" i asked, squinting through the rain. just
then, charlie's cruiser swung around the corner, his
lights shining on the occupants of the car in front of
me.

jacob was already climbing out, his wide grin visible
even through the darkness. in the passenger seat was
a much older man, a heavyset man with a memorable
face - a face that overflowed, the cheeks resting
against his shoulders, with creases running through
the russet skin like an old leather jacket. and the
surprisingly familiar eyes, black eyes that seemed at
the same time both too young and too ancient for the
broad face they were set in. jacob's father, billy
black. i knew him immediately, though in the more
than five years since i'd seen him last i'd managed to
forget his name when charlie had spoken of him my
first day here. he was staring at me, scrutinizing my
face, so i smiled tentatively at him. his eyes were
wide, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. my
smile faded.

another complication, edward had said.

252 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
billy still stared at me with intense, anxious eyes. i
groaned internally. had billy recognized edward so
easily? could he really believe the impossible legends
his son had scoffed at?

the answer was clear in billy's eyes. yes. yes, he
could.

253 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 balancing

"billy!" charlie called as soon as he got out of the car.
i turned toward the house, beckoning to jacob as i
ducked under the porch. i heard charlie greeting
them loudly behind me.

"i'm going to pretend i didn't see you behind the
wheel, jake," he said disapprovingly.

"we get permits early on the rez," jacob said while i
unlocked the door and flicked on the porch light.

"sure you do," charlie laughed.

"i have to get around somehow." i recognized billy's
resonant voice easily, despite the years. the sound of
it made me feel suddenly younger, a child.

i went inside, leaving the door open behind me and
turning on lights before i hung up my jacket. then i
stood in the door, watching anxiously as charlie and
jacob helped billy out of the car and into his
wheelchair. i backed out of the way as the three of
them hurried in, shaking off the rain.

"this is a surprise," charlie was saying.

"it's been too long," billy answered. "i hope it's not a
bad time." his dark eyes flashed up to me again, their
expression unreadable.

"no, it's great. i hope you can stay for the game."
jacob grinned. "i think that's the plan - our tv

254 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
broke last week." billy made a face at his son. "and,
of course, jacob was anxious to see bella again," he
added. jacob scowled and ducked his head while i
fought back a surge of remorse. maybe i'd been too
convincing on the beach.

"are you hungry?" i asked, turning toward the
kitchen. i was eager to escape billy's searching gaze.

"naw, we ate just before we came," jacob answered.

"how about you, charlie?" i called over my shoulder
as i fled around the corner.

"sure," he replied, his voice moving in the direction of
the front room and the tv. i could hear billy's chair
follow.

the grilled cheese sandwiches were in the frying pan
and i was slicing up a tomato when i sensed someone
behind me.

"so, how are things?" jacob asked.

"pretty good." i smiled. his enthusiasm was hard to
resist. "how about you? did you finish your car?"

"no." he frowned. "i still need parts. we borrowed that
one." he pointed with his thumb in the direction of
the front yard.

"sorry. i haven't seen any what was it you were
looking for?"

"master cylinder." he grinned. "is something wrong
with the truck?" he added suddenly.

"no."
255 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh. i just wondered because you weren't driving it." i
stared down at the pan, pulling up the edge of a
sandwich to check the bottom side. "i got a ride with
a friend."

"nice ride." jacob's voice was admiring. "i didn't
recognize the driver, though. i thought i knew most of
the kids around here." i nodded noncommittally,
keeping my eyes down as i flipped sandwiches.

"my dad seemed to know him from somewhere."

"jacob, could you hand me some plates? they're in
the cupboard over the sink."

"sure."

he got the plates in silence. i hoped he would let it
drop now.

"so who was it?" he asked, setting two plates on the
counter next to me. i sighed in defeat. "edward
cullen."

to my surprise, he laughed. i glanced up at him. he
looked a little embarrassed.

"guess that explains it, then," he said. "i wondered
why my dad was acting so strange."

"that's right." i faked an innocent expression. "he
doesn't like the cullens."

"superstitious old man," jacob muttered under his
breath.

256 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you don't think he'd say anything to charlie?" i
couldn't help asking, the words coming out in a low
rush.

jacob stared at me for a moment, and i couldn't read
the expression in his dark eyes. "i doubt it," he finally
answered. "i think charlie chewed him out pretty
good last time. they haven't spoken much since -
tonight is sort of a reunion, i think. i don't think he'd
bring it up again."

"oh," i said, trying to sound indifferent.

i stayed in the front room after i carried the food out
to charlie, pretending to watch the game while jacob
chattered at me. i was really listening to the men's
conversation, watching for any sign that billy was
about to rat me out, trying to think of ways to stop
him if he began. it was a long night. i had a lot of
homework that was going undone, but i was afraid to
leave billy alone with charlie. finally, the game
ended.

"are you and your friends coming back to the beach
soon?" jacob asked as he pushed his father over the
lip of the threshold.

"i'm not sure," i hedged.

"that was fun, charlie," billy said.

"come up for the next game," charlie encouraged.

"sure, sure," billy said. "we'll be here. have a good
night." his eyes shifted to mine, and his smile
disappeared. "you take care, bella," he added
seriously.
257 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"thanks," i muttered, looking away.

i headed for the stairs while charlie waved from the
doorway.

"wait, bella," he said.

i cringed. had billy gotten something in before i'd
joined them in the living room?

but charlie was relaxed, still grinning from the
unexpected visit.

"i didn't get a chance to talk to you tonight. how was
your day?"

"good." i hesitated with one foot on the first stair,
searching for details i could safely share. "my
badminton team won all four games."

"wow, i didn't know you could play badminton."

"well, actually i can't, but my partner is really good," i
admitted.

"who is it?" he asked with token interest.

"um mike newton," i told him reluctantly.

"oh yeah - you said you were friends with the
newton kid." he perked up.

"nice family." he mused for a minute. "why didn't you
ask him to the dance this weekend?"

"dad!" i groaned. "he's kind of dating my friend
jessica. besides, you know i can't dance."

258 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh yeah," he muttered. then he smiled at me
apologetically. "so i guess it's good you'll be gone
saturday i've made plans to go fishing with the
guys from the station. the weather's supposed to be
real warm. but if you wanted to put your trip off till
someone could go with you, i'd stay home. i know i
leave you here alone too much."

"dad, you're doing a great job." i smiled, hoping my
relief didn't show.

"i've never minded being alone - i'm too much like
you." i winked at him, and he smiled his crinkly-eyed
smile.

i slept better that night, too tired to dream again.
when i woke to the pearl gray morning, my mood was
blissful. the tense evening with billy and jacob
seemed harmless enough now; i decided to forget it
completely. i caught myself whistling while i was
pulling the front part of my hair back into a barrette,
and later again as i skipped down the stairs. charlie
noticed.

"you're cheerful this morning," he commented over
breakfast. i shrugged. "it's friday."

i hurried so i would be ready to go the second charlie
left. i had my bag ready, shoes on, teeth brushed, but
even though i rushed to the door as soon as i was
sure charlie would be out of sight, edward was
faster. he was waiting in his shiny car, windows
down, engine off.

i didn't hesitate this time, climbing in the passenger
side quickly, the sooner to see his face. he grinned
259 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
his crooked smile at me, stopping my breath and my
heart. i couldn't imagine how an angel could be any
more glorious. there was nothing about him that
could be improved upon.

"how did you sleep?" he asked. i wondered if he had
any idea how appealing his voice was.

"fine. how was your night?"

"pleasant." his smile was amused; i felt like i was
missing an inside joke.

"can i ask what you did?" i asked.

"no." he grinned. "today is still mine." he wanted to
know about people today: more about rene, her
hobbies, what we'd done in our free time together.
and then the one grandmother i'd known, my few
school friends - embarrassing me when he asked
about boys i'd dated. i was relieved that i'd never
really dated anyone, so that particular conversation
couldn't last long. he seemed as surprised as jessica
and angela by my lack of romantic history.

"so you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in a
serious tone that made me wonder what he was
thinking about.

i was grudgingly honest. "not in phoenix."

his lips pressed together into a hard line.

we were in the cafeteria at this point. the day had
sped by in the blur that was rapidly becoming
routine. i took advantage of his brief pause to take a
bite of my bagel.
260 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i should have let you drive yourself today," he
announced, apropos of nothing, while i chewed.

"why?" i demanded.

"i'm leaving with alice after lunch."

"oh." i blinked, bewildered and disappointed. "that's
okay, it's not that far of a walk."

he frowned at me impatiently. "i'm not going to make
you walk home. we'll go get your truck and leave it
here for you."

"i don't have my key with me," i sighed. "i really don't
mind walking." what i minded was losing my time
with him.

he shook his head. "your truck will be here, and the
key will be in the ignition - unless you're afraid
someone might steal it." he laughed at the thought.

"all right," i agreed, pursing my lips. i was pretty sure
my key was in the pocket of a pair of jeans i wore
wednesday, under a pile of clothes in the laundry
room. even if he broke into my house, or whatever he
was planning, he'd never find it. he seemed to feel the
challenge in my consent. he smirked, overconfident.

"so where are you going?" i asked as casually as i
could manage.

"hunting," he answered grimly. "if i'm going to be
alone with you tomorrow, i'm going to take whatever
precautions i can." his face grew morose and
pleading. "you can always cancel, you know." i looked
down, afraid of the persuasive power of his eyes. i
261 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
refused to be convinced to fear him, no matter how
real the danger might be. it doesn't matter, i repeated
in my head.

"no," i whispered, glancing back at his face. "i can't."

"perhaps you're right," he murmured bleakly. his eyes
seemed to darken in color as i watched.

i changed the subject. "what time will i see you
tomorrow?" i asked, already depressed by the thought
of him leaving now.

"that depends it's a saturday, don't you want to
sleep in?" he offered.

"no," i answered too fast. he restrained a smile.

"the same time as usual, then," he decided. "will
charlie be there?"

"no, he's fishing tomorrow." i beamed at the memory
of how conveniently things had worked out.

his voice turned sharp. "and if you don't come home,
what will he think?"

"i have no idea," i answered coolly. "he knows i've
been meaning to do the laundry. maybe he'll think i
fell in the washer." he scowled at me and i scowled
back. his anger was much more impressive than
mine.

"what are you hunting tonight?" i asked when i was
sure i had lost the glowering contest.

262 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"whatever we find in the park. we aren't going far."
he seemed bemused by my casual reference to his
secret realities.

"why are you going with alice?" i wondered.

"alice is the most supportive." he frowned as he
spoke.

"and the others?" i asked timidly. "what are they?"
his brow puckered for a brief moment. "incredulous,
for the most part." i peeked quickly behind me at his
family. they sat staring off in different directions,
exactly the same as the first time i'd seen them. only
now they were four; their beautiful, bronze-haired
brother sat across from me, his golden eyes troubled.

"they don't like me," i guessed.

"that's not it," he disagreed, but his eyes were too
innocent. "they don't understand why i can't leave
you alone."

i grimaced. "neither do i, for that matter."

edward shook his head slowly, rolling his eyes toward
the ceiling before he met my gaze again. "i told you -
you don't see yourself clearly at all. you're not like
anyone i've ever known. you fascinate me." i glared at
him, sure he was teasing now.

he smiled as he deciphered my expression. "having
the advantages i do," he murmured, touching his
forehead discreetly, "i have a better than average
grasp of human nature. people are predictable. but
you you never do what i expect. you always take me
by surprise."
263 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i looked away, my eyes wandering back to his family,
embarrassed and dissatisfied. his words made me feel
like a science experiment. i wanted to laugh at myself
for expecting anything else.

"that part is easy enough to explain," he continued. i
felt his eyes on my face but i couldn't look at him yet,
afraid he might read the chagrin in my eyes. "but
there's more and it's not so easy to put into words
-" i was still staring at the cullens while he spoke.
suddenly rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister,
turned to look at me. no, not to look - to glare, with
dark, cold eyes. i wanted to look away, but her gaze
held me until edward broke off mid-sentence and
made an angry noise under his breath. it was almost
a hiss.

rosalie turned her head, and i was relieved to be free.
i looked back at edward - and i knew he could see
the confusion and fear that widened my eyes.

his face was tight as he explained. "i'm sorry about
that. she's just worried. you see it's dangerous for
more than just me if, after spending so much time
with you so publicly" he looked down.

"if?"

"if this ends badly." he dropped his head into his
hands, as he had that night in port angeles. his
anguish was plain; i yearned to comfort him, but i
was at a loss to know how. my hand reached toward
him involuntarily; quickly, though, i dropped it to the
table, fearing that my touch would only make things
worse. i realized slowly that his words should frighten

264 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
me. i waited for that fear to come, but all i could seem
to feel was an ache for his pain.

and frustration - frustration that rosalie had
interrupted whatever he was about to say. i didn't
know how to bring it up again. he still had his head
in his hands.

i tried to speak in a normal voice. "and you have to
leave now?"

"yes." he raised his face; it was serious for a moment,
and then his mood shifted and he smiled. "it's
probably for the best. we still have fifteen minutes of
that wretched movie left to endure in biology - i
don't think i could take any more."

i started. alice - her short, inky hair in a halo of
spiky disarray around her exquisite, elfin face - was
suddenly standing behind his shoulder. her slight
frame was willowy, graceful even in absolute stillness.

he greeted her without looking away from me. "alice."

"edward," she answered, her high soprano voice
almost as attractive as his.

"alice, bella - bella, alice," he introduced us,
gesturing casually with his hand, a wry smile on his
face.

"hello, bella." her brilliant obsidian eyes were
unreadable, but her smile was friendly. "it's nice to
finally meet you." edward flashed a dark look at her.

"hi, alice," i murmured shyly.

265 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"are you ready?" she asked him.

his voice was aloof. "nearly. i'll meet you at the car."
she left without another word; her walk was so fluid,
so sinuous that i felt a sharp pang of jealousy.

"should i say 'have fun,' or is that the wrong
sentiment?" i asked, turning back to him.

"no, 'have fun' works as well as anything." he
grinned.

"have fun, then." i worked to sound wholehearted. of
course i didn't fool him.

"i'll try." he still grinned. "and you try to be safe,
please."

"safe in forks - what a challenge."

"for you it is a challenge." his jaw hardened.
"promise."

"i promise to try to be safe," i recited. "i'll do the
laundry tonight -

that ought to be fraught with peril."

"don't fall in," he mocked.

"i'll do my best."

he stood then, and i rose, too.

"i'll see you tomorrow," i sighed.

"it seems like a long time to you, doesn't it?" he
mused. i nodded glumly.

266 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'll be there in the morning," he promised, smiling his
crooked smile. he reached across the table to touch
my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again.
then he turned and walked away. i stared after him
until he was gone.

i was sorely tempted to ditch the rest of the day, at
the very least gym, but a warning instinct stopped
me. i knew that if i disappeared now, mike and others
would assume i was with edward. and edward was
worried about the time we'd spent together publicly
if things went wrong. i refused to dwell on the last
thought, concentrating instead on making things
safer for him.

i intuitively knew - and sensed he did, too - that
tomorrow would be pivotal. our relationship couldn't
continue to balance, as it did, on the point of a knife.
we would fall off one edge or the other, depending
entirely upon his decision, or his instincts. my
decision was made, made before i'd ever consciously
chosen, and i was committed to seeing it through.
because there was nothing more terrifying to me,
more excruciating, than the thought of turning away
from him. it was an impossibility.

i went to class, feeling dutiful. i couldn't honestly say
what happened in biology; my mind was too
preoccupied with thoughts of tomorrow. in gym, mike
was speaking to me again; he wished me a good time
in seattle. i carefully explained that i'd canceled my
trip, worried about my truck.

"are you going to the dance with cullen?" he asked,
suddenly sulky.

267 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no, i'm not going to the dance at all."

"what are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested.
my natural urge was to tell him to butt out. instead, i
lied brightly.

"laundry, and then i have to study for the trig test or
i'm going to fail."

"is cullen helping you study?"

"edward," i emphasized, "is not going to help me
study. he's gone away somewhere for the weekend."
the lies came more naturally than usual, i noted with
surprise.

"oh." he perked up. "you know, you could come to
the dance with our group anyway - that would be
cool. we'd all dance with you," he promised. the
mental image of jessica's face made my tone sharper
than necessary.

"i'm not going to the dance, mike, okay?"

"fine." he sulked again. "i was just offering." when
the school day had finally ended, i walked to the
parking lot without enthusiasm. i did not especially
want to walk home, but i couldn't see how he would
have retrieved my truck. then again, i was starting to
believe that nothing was impossible for him. the
latter instinct proved correct - my truck sat in the
same space he'd parked his volvo in this morning. i
shook my head, incredulous, as i opened the
unlocked door and saw the key in the ignition.

268 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
there was a piece of white paper folded on my seat. i
got in and closed the door before i unfolded it. two
words were written in his elegant script.

be safe.

the sound of the truck roaring to life frightened me. i
laughed at myself. when i got home, the handle of the
door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as i'd
left it this morning. inside, i went straight to the
laundry room. it looked just the same as i'd left it,
too. i dug for my jeans and, after finding them,
checked the pockets. empty. maybe i'd hung my key
up after all, i thought, shaking my head.

following the same instinct that had prompted me to
lie to mike, i called jessica on the pretense of wishing
her luck at the dance. when she offered the same
wish for my day with edward, i told her about the
cancellation. she was more disappointed than really
necessary for a third-party observer to be. i said
goodbye quickly after that. charlie was absentminded
at dinner, worried over something at work, i guessed,
or maybe a basketball game, or maybe he was just
really enjoying the lasagna - it was hard to tell with
charlie.

"you know, dad" i began, breaking into his reverie.

"what's that, bell?"

"i think you're right about seattle. i think i'll wait
until jessica or someone else can go with me."

"oh," he said, surprised. "oh, okay. so, do you want
me to stay home?"

269 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no, dad, don't change your plans. i've got a million
things to do

homework, laundry i need to go to the library and
the grocery store. i'll be in and out all day you go
and have fun."

"are you sure?"

"absolutely, dad. besides, the freezer is getting
dangerously low on fish

- we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply."

"you're sure easy to live with, bella." he smiled.

"i could say the same thing about you," i said,
laughing. the sound of my laughter was off, but he
didn't seem to notice. i felt so guilty for deceiving him
that i almost took edward's advice and told him
where i would be. almost.

after dinner, i folded clothes and moved another load
through the dryer. unfortunately it was the kind of
job that only keeps hands busy. my mind definitely
had too much free time, and it was getting out of
control. i fluctuated between anticipation so intense
that it was very nearly pain, and an insidious fear
that picked at my resolve. i had to keep reminding
myself that i'd made my choice, and i wasn't going
back on it. i pulled his note out of my pocket much
more often than necessary to absorb the two small
words he'd written. he wants me to be safe, i told
myself again and again. i would just hold on to the
faith that, in the end, that desire would win out over
the others. and what was my other choice - to cut

270 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
him out of my life? intolerable. besides, since i'd
come to forks, it really seemed like my life was about
him.

but a tiny voice in the back of my mind worried,
wondering if it would hurt very much if it ended
badly.

i was relieved when it was late enough to be
acceptable for bedtime. i knew i was far too stressed
to sleep, so i did something i'd never done before. i
deliberately took unnecessary cold medicine - the
kind that knocked me out for a good eight hours. i
normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in
myself, but tomorrow would be complicated enough
without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top
of everything else. while i waited for the drugs to kick
in, i dried my clean hair till it was impeccably
straight, and fussed over what i would wear
tomorrow. with everything ready for the morning, i
finally lay in my bed. i felt hyper; i couldn't stop
twitching. i got up and rifled through my shoebox of
cds until i found a collection of chopin's nocturnes. i
put that on very quietly and then lay down again,
concentrating on relaxing individual parts of my body.
somewhere in the middle of that exercise, the cold
pills took effect, and i gladly sank into
unconsciousness. i woke early, having slept soundly
and dreamlessly thanks to my gratuitous drug use.
though i was well rested, i slipped right back into the
same hectic frenzy from the night before. i dressed in
a rush, smoothing my collar against my neck,
fidgeting with the tan sweater till it hung right over
my jeans. i sneaked a swift look out the window to

271 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
see that charlie was already gone. a thin, cottony
layer of clouds veiled the sky. they didn't look very
lasting.

i ate breakfast without tasting the food, hurrying to
clean up when i was done. i peeked out the window
again, but nothing had changed. i had just finished
brushing my teeth and was heading back downstairs
when a quiet knock sent my heart thudding against
my rib cage.

i flew to the door; i had a little trouble with the simple
dead bolt, but i yanked the door open at last, and
there he was. all the agitation dissolved as soon as i
looked at his face, calm taking its place. i breathed a
sigh of relief - yesterday's fears seemed very foolish
with him here.

he wasn't smiling at first - his face was somber. but
then his expression lightened as he looked me over,
and he laughed.

"good morning," he chuckled.

"what's wrong?" i glanced down to make sure i hadn't
forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants.

"we match." he laughed again. i realized he had a
long, light tan sweater on, with a white collar showing
underneath, and blue jeans. i laughed with him,
hiding a secret twinge of regret - why did he have to
look like a runway model when i couldn't?

i locked the door behind me while he walked to the
truck. he waited by the passenger door with a
martyred expression that was easy to understand.

272 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"we made a deal," i reminded him smugly, climbing
into the driver's seat, and reaching over to unlock his
door.

"where to?" i asked.

"put your seat belt on - i'm nervous already."

i gave him a dirty look as i complied.

"where to?" i repeated with a sigh.

"take the one-oh-one north," he ordered.

it was surprisingly difficult to concentrate on the road
while feeling his gaze on my face. i compensated by
driving more carefully than usual through the still-
sleeping town.

"were you planning to make it out of forks before
nightfall?"

"this truck is old enough to be your car's grandfather
- have some respect," i retorted.

we were soon out of the town limits, despite his
negativity. thick underbrush and green-swathed
trunks replaced the lawns and houses.

"turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as i
was about to ask. i obeyed silently.

"now we drive until the pavement ends."

i could hear a smile in his voice, but i was too afraid
of driving off the road and proving him right to look
over and be sure.

273 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and what's there, at the pavement's end?" i
wondered.

"a trail."

"we're hiking?" thank goodness i'd worn tennis
shoes.

"is that a problem?" he sounded as if he'd expected as
much.

"no." i tried to make the lie sound confident. but if he
thought my truck was slow

"don't worry, it's only five miles or so, and we're in no
hurry." five miles. i didn't answer, so that he
wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. five miles of
treacherous roots and loose stones, trying to twist my
ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. this was going
to be humiliating. we drove in silence for a while as i
contemplated the coming horror.

"what are you thinking?" he asked impatiently after a
few moments. i lied again. "just wondering where
we're going."

"it's a place i like to go when the weather is nice." we
both glanced out the windows at the thinning clouds
after he spoke.

"charlie said it would be warm today."

"and did you tell charlie what you were up to?" he
asked.

"nope."

274 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"but jessica thinks we're going to seattle together?"
he seemed cheered by the idea.

"no, i told her you canceled on me - which is true."

"no one knows you're with me?" angrily, now.

"that depends i assume you told alice?"

"that's very helpful, bella," he snapped.

i pretended i didn't hear that.

"are you so depressed by forks that it's made you
suicidal?" he demanded when i ignored him.

"you said it might cause trouble for you us being
together publicly," i reminded him.

"so you're worried about the trouble it might cause
me- if you don't come home?" his voice was still
angry, and bitingly sarcastic. i nodded, keeping my
eyes on the road.

he muttered something under his breath, speaking so
quickly that i couldn't understand.

we were silent for the rest of the drive. i could feel the
waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and
i could think of nothing to say.

and then the road ended, constricting to a thin foot
trail with a small wooden marker. i parked on the
narrow shoulder and stepped out, afraid because he
was angry with me and i didn't have driving as an
excuse not to look at him. it was warm now, warmer
than it had been in forks since the day i'd arrived,
almost muggy under the clouds. i pulled off my
275 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
sweater and knotted it around my waist, glad that i'd
worn the light, sleeveless shirt - especially if i had
five miles of hiking ahead of me. i heard his door
slam, and looked over to see that he'd removed his
sweater, too. he was facing away from me, into the
unbroken forest beside my truck.

"this way," he said, glancing over his shoulder at me,
eyes still annoyed. he started into the dark forest.

"the trail?" panic was clear in my voice as i hurried
around the truck to catch up to him.

"i said there was a trail at the end of the road, not
that we were taking it."

"no trail?" i asked desperately.

"i won't let you get lost." he turned then, with a
mocking smile, and i stifled a gasp. his white shirt
was sleeveless, and he wore it unbuttoned, so that
the smooth white skin of his throat flowed
uninterrupted over the marble contours of his chest,
his perfect musculature no longer merely hinted at
behind concealing clothes. he was too perfect, i
realized with a piercing stab of despair. there was no
way this godlike creature could be meant for me.

he stared at me, bewildered by my tortured
expression.

"do you want to go home?" he said quietly, a different
pain than mine saturating his voice.

"no." i walked forward till i was close beside him,
anxious not to waste one second of whatever time i
might have with him.
276 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what's wrong?" he asked, his voice gentle.

"i'm not a good hiker," i answered dully. "you'll have
to be very patient."

"i can be patient - if i make a great effort." he
smiled, holding my glance, trying to lift me out of my
sudden, unexplained dejection. i tried to smile back,
but the smile was unconvincing. he scrutinized my
face.

"i'll take you home," he promised. i couldn't tell if the
promise was unconditional, or restricted to an
immediate departure. i knew he thought it was fear
that upset me, and i was grateful again that i was the
one person whose mind he couldn't hear.

"if you want me to hack five miles through the jungle
before sundown, you'd better start leading the way," i
said acidly. he frowned at me, struggling to
understand my tone and expression.

he gave up after a moment and led the way into the
forest. it wasn't as hard as i had feared. the way was
mostly flat, and he held the damp ferns and webs of
moss aside for me. when his straight path took us
over fallen trees or boulders, he would help me, lifting
me by the elbow, and then releasing me instantly
when i was clear. his cold touch on my skin never
failed to make my heart thud erratically. twice, when
that happened, i caught a look on his face that made
me sure he could somehow hear it.

i tried to keep my eyes away from his perfection as
much as possible, but i slipped often. each time, his
beauty pierced me through with sadness. for the
277 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
most part, we walked in silence. occasionally he
would ask a random question that he hadn't gotten to
in the past two days of interrogation. he asked about
my birthdays, my grade school teachers, my
childhood pets - and i had to admit that after killing
three fish in a row, i'd given up on the whole
institution. he laughed at that, louder than i was
used to - bell-like echoes bouncing back to us from
the empty woods.

the hike took me most of the morning, but he never
showed any sign of impatience. the forest spread out
around us in a boundless labyrinth of ancient trees,
and i began to be nervous that we would never find
our way out again. he was perfectly at ease,
comfortable in the green maze, never seeming to feel
any doubt about our direction.

after several hours, the light that filtered through the
canopy transformed, the murky olive tone shifting to
a brighter jade. the day had turned sunny, just as
he'd foretold. for the first time since we'd entered the
woods, i felt a thrill of excitement - which quickly
turned to impatience.

"are we there yet?" i teased, pretending to scowl.

"nearly." he smiled at the change in my mood. "do
you see the brightness ahead?"

i peered into the thick forest. "um, should i?" he
smirked. "maybe it's a bit soon for your eyes."

"time to visit the optometrist," i muttered. his smirk
grew more pronounced.

278 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
but then, after another hundred yards, i could
definitely see a lightening in the trees ahead, a glow
that was yellow instead of green. i picked up the pace,
my eagerness growing with every step. he let me lead
now, following noiselessly.

i reached the edge of the pool of light and stepped
through the last fringe of ferns into the loveliest place
i had ever seen. the meadow was small, perfectly
round, and filled with wildflowers - violet, yellow,
and soft white. somewhere nearby, i could hear the
bubbling music of a stream. the sun was directly
overhead, filling the circle with a haze of buttery
sunshine. i walked slowly, awestruck, through the
soft grass, swaying flowers, and warm, gilded air. i
halfway turned, wanting to share this with him, but
he wasn't behind me where i thought he'd be. i spun
around, searching for him with sudden alarm. finally
i spotted him, still under the dense shade of the
canopy at the edge of the hollow, watching me with
cautious eyes. only then did i remember what the
beauty of the meadow had driven from my mind -
the enigma of edward and the sun, which he'd
promised to illustrate for me today.

i took a step back toward him, my eyes alight with
curiosity. his eyes were wary, reluctant. i smiled
encouragingly and beckoned to him with my hand,
taking another step back to him. he held up a hand
in warning, and i hesitated, rocking back onto my
heels.

edward seemed to take a deep breath, and then he
stepped out into the bright glow of the midday sun.

279 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
280 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 confessions

edward in the sunlight was shocking. i couldn't get
used to it, though i'd been staring at him all
afternoon. his skin, white despite the faint flush from
yesterday's hunting trip, literally sparkled, like
thousands of tiny diamonds were embedded in the
surface. he lay perfectly still in the grass, his shirt
open over his sculpted, incandescent chest, his
scintillating arms bare. his glistening, pale lavender
lids were shut, though of course he didn't sleep. a
perfect statue, carved in some unknown stone,
smooth like marble, glittering like crystal. now and
then, his lips would move, so fast it looked like they
were trembling. but, when i asked, he told me he was
singing to himself; it was too low for me to hear.

i enjoyed the sun, too, though the air wasn't quite dry
enough for my taste. i would have liked to lie back, as
he did, and let the sun warm my face. but i stayed
curled up, my chin resting on my knees, unwilling to
take my eyes off him. the wind was gentle; it tangled
my hair and ruffled the grass that swayed around his
motionless form.

the meadow, so spectacular to me at first, paled next
to his magnificence. hesitantly, always afraid, even
now, that he would disappear like a mirage, too
beautiful to be real hesitantly, i reached out one
finger and stroked the back of his shimmering hand,
where it lay within my reach. i marveled again at the
perfect texture, satin smooth, cool as stone. when i

281 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
looked up again, his eyes were open, watching me.
butterscotch today, lighter, warmer after hunting. his
quick smile turned up the corners of his flawless lips.

"i don't scare you?" he asked playfully, but i could
hear the real curiosity in his soft voice.

"no more than usual."

he smiled wider; his teeth flashed in the sun.

i inched closer, stretched out my whole hand now to
trace the contours of his forearm with my fingertips. i
saw that my fingers trembled, and knew it wouldn't
escape his notice.

"do you mind?" i asked, for he had closed his eyes
again.

"no," he said without opening his eyes. "you can't
imagine how that feels." he sighed.

i lightly trailed my hand over the perfect muscles of
his arm, followed the faint pattern of bluish veins
inside the crease at his elbow. with my other hand, i
reached to turn his hand over. realizing what i
wished, he flipped his palm up in one of those
blindingly fast, disconcerting movements of his. it
startled me; my fingers froze on his arm for a brief
second.

"sorry," he murmured. i looked up in time to see his
golden eyes close again. "it's too easy to be myself
with you."

282 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i lifted his hand, turning it this way and that as i
watched the sun glitter on his palm. i held it closer to
my face, trying to see the hidden facets in his skin.

"tell me what you're thinking," he whispered. i looked
to see his eyes watching me, suddenly intent. "it's still
so strange for me, not knowing."

"you know, the rest of us feel that way all the time."

"it's a hard life." did i imagine the hint of regret in his
tone? "but you didn't tell me."

"i was wishing i could know what you were
thinking" i hesitated.

"and?"

"i was wishing that i could believe that you were real.
and i was wishing that i wasn't afraid."

"i don't want you to be afraid." his voice was just a
soft murmur. i heard what he couldn't truthfully say,
that i didn't need to be afraid, that there was nothing
to fear.

"well, that's not exactly the fear i meant, though
that's certainly something to think about."

so quickly that i missed his movement, he was half
sitting, propped up on his right arm, his left palm still
in my hands. his angel's face was only a few inches
from mine. i might have - should have - flinched
away from his unexpected closeness, but i was
unable to move. his golden eyes mesmerized me.

283 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what are you afraid of, then?" he whispered intently.
but i couldn't answer. as i had just that once before,
i smelled his cool breath in my face. sweet, delicious,
the scent made my mouth water. it was unlike
anything else. instinctively, unthinkingly, i leaned
closer, inhaling.

and he was gone, his hand ripped from mine. in the
time it took my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet
away, standing at the edge of the small meadow, in
the deep shade of a huge fir tree. he stared at me, his
eyes dark in the shadows, his expression unreadable.

i could feel the hurt and shock on my face. my empty
hands stung.

"i'm sorry edward," i whispered. i knew he could
hear.

"give me a moment," he called, just loud enough for
my less sensitive ears. i sat very still.

after ten incredibly long seconds, he walked back,
slowly for him. he stopped, still several feet away, and
sank gracefully to the ground, crossing his legs. his
eyes never left mine. he took two deep breaths, and
then smiled in apology.

"i am so very sorry." he hesitated. "would you
understand what i meant if i said i was only human?"

i nodded once, not quite able to smile at his joke.
adrenaline pulsed through my veins as the realization
of danger slowly sank in. he could smell that from
where he sat. his smile turned mocking.

284 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm the world's best predator, aren't i? everything
about me invites you in - my voice, my face, even my
smell. as if i need any of that!" unexpectedly, he was
on his feet, bounding away, instantly out of sight,
only to appear beneath the same tree as before,
having circled the meadow in half a second.

"as if you could outrun me," he laughed bitterly. he
reached up with one hand and, with a deafening
crack, effortlessly ripped a two-foot-thick branch from
the trunk of the spruce. he balanced it in that hand
for a moment, and then threw it with blinding speed,
shattering it against another huge tree, which shook
and trembled at the blow.

and he was in front of me again, standing two feet
away, still as a stone.

"as if you could fight me off," he said gently. i sat
without moving, more frightened of him than i had
ever been. i'd never seen him so completely freed of
that carefully cultivated facade. he'd never been less
human or more beautiful. face ashen, eyes wide, i
sat like a bird locked in the eyes of a snake.

his lovely eyes seem to glow with rash excitement.
then, as the seconds passed, they dimmed. his
expression slowly folded into a mask of ancient
sadness.

"don't be afraid," he murmured, his velvet voice
unintentionally seductive. "i promise" he hesitated.
"i swear not to hurt you." he seemed more concerned
with convincing himself than me.

285 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"don't be afraid," he whispered again as he stepped
closer, with exaggerated slowness. he sat sinuously,
with deliberately unhurried movements, till our faces
were on the same level, just a foot apart.

"please forgive me," he said formally. "i can control
myself. you caught me off guard. but i'm on my best
behavior now."

he waited, but i still couldn't speak.

"i'm not thirsty today, honestly." he winked.

at that i had to laugh, though the sound was shaky
and breathless.

"are you all right?" he asked tenderly, reaching out
slowly, carefully, to place his marble hand back in
mine.

i looked at his smooth, cold hand, and then at his
eyes. they were soft, repentant. i looked back at his
hand, and then deliberately returned to tracing the
lines in his hand with my fingertip. i looked up and
smiled timidly.

his answering smile was dazzling.

"so where were we, before i behaved so rudely?" he
asked in the gentle cadences of an earlier century.

"i honestly can't remember."

he smiled, but his face was ashamed. "i think we
were talking about why you were afraid, besides the
obvious reason."

"oh, right."
286 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"well?"

i looked down at his hand and doodled aimlessly
across his smooth, iridescent palm. the seconds
ticked by.

"how easily frustrated i am," he sighed. i looked into
his eyes, abruptly grasping that this was every bit as
new to him as it was to me. as many years of
unfathomable experience as he had, this was hard for
him, too. i took courage from that thought.

"i was afraid because, for, well, obvious reasons, i
can't stay with you. and i'm afraid that i'd like to stay
with you, much more than i should." i looked down at
his hands as i spoke. it was difficult for me to say this
aloud.

"yes," he agreed slowly. "that is something to be
afraid of, indeed. wanting to be with me. that's really
not in your best interest." i frowned.

"i should have left long ago," he sighed. "i should
leave now. but i don't know if i can."

"i don't want you to leave," i mumbled pathetically,
staring down again.

"which is exactly why i should. but don't worry. i'm
essentially a selfish creature. i crave your company
too much to do what i should."

"i'm glad."

"don't be!" he withdrew his hand, more gently this
time; his voice was harsher than usual. harsh for
him, still more beautiful than any human voice. it
287 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
was hard to keep up - his sudden mood changes left
me always a step behind, dazed.

"it's not only your company i crave! never forget that.
never forget i am more dangerous to you than i am to
anyone else." he stopped, and i looked to see him
gazing unseeingly into the forest.

i thought for a moment.

"i don't think i understand exactly what you mean -
by that last part anyway," i said.

he looked back at me and smiled, his mood shifting
yet again.

"how do i explain?" he mused. "and without
frightening you again hmmmm." without seeming
to think about it, he placed his hand back in mine; i
held it tightly in both of mine. he looked at our
hands.

"that's amazingly pleasant, the warmth." he sighed. a
moment passed as he assembled his thoughts.

"you know how everyone enjoys different flavors?" he
began. "some people love chocolate ice cream, others
prefer strawberry?" i nodded.

"sorry about the food analogy - i couldn't think of
another way to explain."

i smiled. he smiled ruefully back.

"you see, every person smells different, has a different
essence. if you locked an alcoholic in a room full of
stale beer, he'd gladly drink it. but he could resist, if

288 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he wished to, if he were a recovering alcoholic. now
let's say you placed in that room a glass of hundred-
year-old brandy, the rarest, finest cognac - and filled
the room with its warm aroma - how do you think he
would fare then?"

we sat silently, looking into each other's eyes -
trying to read each other's thoughts.

he broke the silence first.

"maybe that's not the right comparison. maybe it
would be too easy to turn down the brandy. perhaps i
should have made our alcoholic a heroin addict
instead."

"so what you're saying is, i'm your brand of heroin?" i
teased, trying to lighten the mood.

he smiled swiftly, seeming to appreciate my effort.
"yes, you are exactly my brand of heroin."

"does that happen often?" i asked.

he looked across the treetops, thinking through his
response.

"i spoke to my brothers about it." he still stared into
the distance. "to jasper, every one of you is much the
same. he's the most recent to join our family. it's a
struggle for him to abstain at all. he hasn't had time
to grow sensitive to the differences in smell, in flavor."
he glanced swiftly at me, his expression apologetic.

"sorry," he said.

289 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i don't mind. please don't worry about offending me,
or frightening me, or whichever. that's the way you
think. i can understand, or i can try to at least. just
explain however you can."

he took a deep breath and gazed at the sky again.

"so jasper wasn't sure if he'd ever come across
someone who was as" - he hesitated, looking for the
right word - "appealing as you are to me. which
makes me think not. emmett has been on the wagon
longer, so to speak, and he understood what i meant.
he says twice, for him, once stronger than the other."

"and for you?"

"never."

the word hung there for a moment in the warm
breeze.

"what did emmett do?" i asked to break the silence. it
was the wrong question to ask. his face grew dark,
his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. he looked
away. i waited, but he wasn't going to answer.

"i guess i know," i finally said.

he lifted his eyes; his expression was wistful,
pleading.

"even the strongest of us fall off the wagon, don't we?"

"what are you asking? my permission?" my voice was
sharper than i'd intended. i tried to make my tone
kinder - i could guess what his honesty must cost

290 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
him. "i mean, is there no hope, then?" how calmly i
could discuss my own death!

"no, no!" he was instantly contrite. "of course there's
hope! i mean, of course i won't" he left the sentence
hanging. his eyes burned into mine.

"it's different for us. emmett these were strangers
he happened across. it was a long time ago, and he
wasn't as practiced, as careful, as he is now."

he fell silent and watched me intently as i thought it
through.

"so if we'd met oh, in a dark alley or something" i
trailed off.

"it took everything i had not to jump up in the middle
of that class full of children and -" he stopped
abruptly, looking away. "when you walked past me, i
could have ruined everything carlisle has built for us,
right then and there. if i hadn't been denying my
thirst for the last, well, too many years, i wouldn't
have been able to stop myself." he paused, scowling
at the trees.

he glanced at me grimly, both of us remembering.
"you must have thought i was possessed."

"i couldn't understand why. how you could hate me
so quickly"

"to me, it was like you were some kind of demon,
summoned straight from my own personal hell to ruin
me. the fragrance coming off your skin i thought it
would make me deranged that first day. in that one
hour, i thought of a hundred different ways to lure
291 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
you from the room with me, to get you alone. and i
fought them each back, thinking of my family, what i
could do to them. i had to run out, to get away before
i could speak the words that would make you
follow"

he looked up then at my staggered expression as i
tried to absorb his bitter memories. his golden eyes
scorched from under his lashes, hypnotic and deadly.

"you would have come," he promised.

i tried to speak calmly. "without a doubt."

he frowned down at my hands, releasing me from the
force of his stare.

"and then, as i tried to rearrange my schedule in a
pointless attempt to avoid you, you were there - in
that close, warm little room, the scent was
maddening. i so very nearly took you then. there was
only one other frail human there - so easily dealt
with."

i shivered in the warm sun, seeing my memories
anew through his eyes, only now grasping the danger.
poor ms. cope; i shivered again at how close i'd come
to being inadvertently responsible for her death.

"but i resisted. i don't know how. i forced myself not
to wait for you, not to follow you from the school. it
was easier outside, when i couldn't smell you
anymore, to think clearly, to make the right decision.
i left the others near home - i was too ashamed to
tell them how weak i was, they only knew something
was very wrong - and then i went straight to

292 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
carlisle, at the hospital, to tell him i was leaving." i
stared in surprise.

"i traded cars with him - he had a full tank of gas
and i didn't want to stop. i didn't dare to go home, to
face esme. she wouldn't have let me go without a
scene. she would have tried to convince me that it
wasn't necessary

"by the next morning i was in alaska." he sounded
ashamed, as if admitting a great cowardice. "i spent
two days there, with some old acquaintances but i
was homesick. i hated knowing i'd upset esme, and
the rest of them, my adopted family. in the pure air of
the mountains it was hard to believe you were so
irresistible. i convinced myself it was weak to run
away. i'd dealt with temptation before, not of this
magnitude, not even close, but i was strong. who
were you, an insignificant little girl" - he grinned
suddenly - "to chase me from the place i wanted to
be? so i came back" he stared off into space. i
couldn't speak.

"i took precautions, hunting, feeding more than usual
before seeing you again. i was sure that i was strong
enough to treat you like any other human. i was
arrogant about it.

"it was unquestionably a complication that i couldn't
simply read your thoughts to know what your
reaction was to me. i wasn't used to having to go to
such circuitous measures, listening to your words in
jessica's mind her mind isn't very original, and it
was annoying to have to stoop to that. and then i
couldn't know if you really meant what you said. it

293 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
was all extremely irritating." he frowned at the
memory.

"i wanted you to forget my behavior that first day, if
possible, so i tried to talk with you like i would with
any person. i was eager actually, hoping to decipher
some of your thoughts. but you were too interesting, i
found myself caught up in your expressions and
every now and then you would stir the air with your
hand or your hair, and the scent would stun me
again

"of course, then you were nearly crushed to death in
front of my eyes. later i thought of a perfectly good
excuse for why i acted at that moment

- because if i hadn't saved you, if your blood had
been spilled there in front of me, i don't think i could
have stopped myself from exposing us for what we
are. but i only thought of that excuse later. at the
time, all i could think was, 'not her.'"

he closed his eyes, lost in his agonized confession. i
listened, more eager than rational. common sense
told me i should be terrified. instead, i was relieved to
finally understand. and i was filled with compassion
for his suffering, even now, as he confessed his
craving to take my life. i finally was able to speak,
though my voice was faint. "in the hospital?" his eyes
flashed up to mine. "i was appalled. i couldn't believe
i had put us in danger after all, put myself in your
power - you of all people. as if i needed another
motive to kill you." we both flinched as that word
slipped out. "but it had the opposite effect," he
continued quickly. "i fought with rosalie, emmett,

294 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and jasper when they suggested that now was the
time the worst fight we've ever had. carlisle sided
with me, and alice." he grimaced when he said her
name. i couldn't imagine why. "esme told me to do
whatever i had to in order to stay." he shook his head
indulgently.

"all that next day i eavesdropped on the minds of
everyone you spoke to, shocked that you kept your
word. i didn't understand you at all. but i knew that i
couldn't become more involved with you. i did my very
best to stay as far from you as possible. and every
day the perfume of your skin, your breath, your
hair it hit me as hard as the very first day." he met
my eyes again, and they were surprisingly tender.

"and for all that," he continued, "i'd have fared better
if i had exposed us all at that first moment, than if
now, here - with no witnesses and nothing to stop
me - i were to hurt you."

i was human enough to have to ask. "why?"

"isabella." he pronounced my full name carefully,
then playfully ruffled my hair with his free hand. a
shock ran through my body at his casual touch.
"bella, i couldn't live with myself if i ever hurt you.
you don't know how it's tortured me." he looked
down, ashamed again. "the thought of you, still,
white, cold to never see you blush scarlet again, to
never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when
you see through my pretenses it would be
unendurable." he lifted his glorious, agonized eyes to
mine. "you are the most important thing to me now.
the most important thing to me ever."

295 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
my head was spinning at the rapid change in
direction our conversation had taken. from the
cheerful topic of my impending demise, we were
suddenly declaring ourselves. he waited, and even
though i looked down to study our hands between us,
i knew his golden eyes were on me. "you already
know how i feel, of course," i finally said. "i'm here
which, roughly translated, means i would rather die
than stay away from you." i frowned. "i'm an idiot."

"you are an idiot," he agreed with a laugh. our eyes
met, and i laughed, too. we laughed together at the
idiocy and sheer impossibility of such a moment.

"and so the lion fell in love with the lamb" he
murmured. i looked away, hiding my eyes as i thrilled
to the word.

"what a stupid lamb," i sighed.

"what a sick, masochistic lion." he stared into the
shadowy forest for a long moment, and i wondered
where his thoughts had taken him.

"why ?" i began, and then paused, not sure how to
continue. he looked at me and smiled; sunlight
glinted off his face, his teeth.

"yes?"

"tell me why you ran from me before."

his smile faded. "you know why."

"no, i mean, exactly what did i do wrong? i'll have to
be on my guard, you see, so i better start learning
what i shouldn't do. this, for example" - i stroked
296 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the back of his hand - "seems to be all right." he
smiled again. "you didn't do anything wrong, bella. it
was my fault."

"but i want to help, if i can, to not make this harder
for you."

"well" he contemplated for a moment. "it was just
how close you were. most humans instinctively shy
away from us, are repelled by our alienness i wasn't
expecting you to come so close. and the smell of your
throat." he stopped short, looking to see if he'd upset
me.

"okay, then," i said flippantly, trying to alleviate the
suddenly tense atmosphere. i tucked my chin. "no
throat exposure." it worked; he laughed. "no, really, it
was more the surprise than anything else."

he raised his free hand and placed it gently on the
side of my neck. i sat very still, the chill of his touch a
natural warning - a warning telling me to be
terrified. but there was no feeling of fear in me. there
were, however, other feelings

"you see," he said. "perfectly fine." my blood was
racing, and i wished i could slow it, sensing that this
must make everything so much more difficult - the
thudding of my pulse in my veins. surely he could
hear it.

"the blush on your cheeks is lovely," he murmured.
he gently freed his other hand. my hands fell limply
into my lap. softly he brushed my cheek, then held
my face between his marble hands.

297 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"be very still," he whispered, as if i wasn't already
frozen. slowly, never moving his eyes from mine, he
leaned toward me. then abruptly, but very gently, he
rested his cold cheek against the hollow at the base of
my throat. i was quite unable to move, even if i'd
wanted to. i listened to the sound of his even
breathing, watching the sun and wind play in his
bronze hair, more human than any other part of him.
with deliberate slowness, his hands slid down the
sides of my neck. i shivered, and i heard him catch
his breath. but his hands didn't pause as they softly
moved to my shoulders, and then stopped.

his face drifted to the side, his nose skimming across
my collarbone. he came to rest with the side of his
face pressed tenderly against my chest. listening to
my heart.

"ah," he sighed.

i don't know how long we sat without moving. it could
have been hours. eventually the throb of my pulse
quieted, but he didn't move or speak again as he held
me. i knew at any moment it could be too much, and
my life could end - so quickly that i might not even
notice. and i couldn't make myself be afraid. i
couldn't think of anything, except that he was
touching me.

and then, too soon, he released me.

his eyes were peaceful.

"it won't be so hard again," he said with satisfaction.

"was that very hard for you?"

298 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"not nearly as bad as i imagined it would be. and
you?"

"no, it wasn't bad for me."

he smiled at my inflection. "you know what i mean." i
smiled.

"here." he took my hand and placed it against his
cheek. "do you feel how warm it is?"

and it was almost warm, his usually icy skin. but i
barely noticed, for i was touching his face, something
i'd dreamed of constantly since the first day i'd seen
him.

"don't move," i whispered.

no one could be still like edward. he closed his eyes
and became as immobile as stone, a carving under
my hand.

i moved even more slowly than he had, careful not to
make one unexpected move. i caressed his cheek,
delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in the
hollow under his eye. i traced the shape of his perfect
nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless lips. his lips
parted under my hand, and i could feel his cool
breath on my fingertips. i wanted to lean in, to inhale
the scent of him. so i dropped my hand and leaned
away, not wanting to push him too far.

he opened his eyes, and they were hungry. not in a
way to make me fear, but rather to tighten the
muscles in the pit of my stomach and send my pulse
hammering through my veins again.

299 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i wish," he whispered, "i wish you could feel the
complexity the confusion i feel. that you could
understand."

he raised his hand to my hair, then carefully brushed
it across my face.

"tell me," i breathed.

"i don't think i can. i've told you, on the one hand, the
hunger - the thirst - that, deplorable creature that i
am, i feel for you. and i think you can understand
that, to an extent. though" - he half-smiled - "as
you are not addicted to any illegal substances, you
probably can't empathize completely.

"but" his fingers touched my lips lightly, making
me shiver again.

"there are other hungers. hungers i don't even
understand, that are foreign to me."

"i may understand that better than you think."

"i'm not used to feeling so human. is it always like
this?"

"for me?" i paused. "no, never. never before this." he
held my hands between his. they felt so feeble in his
iron strength.

"i don't know how to be close to you," he admitted. "i
don't know if i can."

i leaned forward very slowly, cautioning him with my
eyes. i placed my cheek against his stone chest. i
could hear his breath, and nothing else.

300 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"this is enough," i sighed, closing my eyes.

in a very human gesture, he put his arms around me
and pressed his face against my hair.

"you're better at this than you give yourself credit
for," i noted.

"i have human instincts - they may be buried deep,
but they're there." we sat like that for another
immeasurable moment; i wondered if he could be as
unwilling to move as i was. but i could see the light
was fading, the shadows of the forest beginning to
touch us, and i sighed.

"you have to go."

"i thought you couldn't read my mind."

"it's getting clearer." i could hear a smile in his voice.
he took my shoulders and i looked into his face.

"can i show you something?" he asked, sudden
excitement flaring in his eyes.

"show me what?"

"i'll show you how i travel in the forest." he saw my
expression. "don't worry, you'll be very safe, and we'll
get to your truck much faster." his mouth twitched
up into that crooked smile so beautiful my heart
nearly stopped.

"will you turn into a bat?" i asked warily.

he laughed, louder than i'd ever heard. "like i haven't
heard that one before!"

301 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"right, i'm sure you get that all the time."

"come on, little coward, climb on my back."

i waited to see if he was kidding, but, apparently, he
meant it. he smiled as he read my hesitation, and
reached for me. my heart reacted; even though he
couldn't hear my thoughts, my pulse always gave me
away. he then proceeded to sling me onto his back,
with very little effort on my part, besides, when in
place, clamping my legs and arms so tightly around
him that it would choke a normal person. it was like
clinging to a stone.

"i'm a bit heavier than your average backpack," i
warned.

"hah!" he snorted. i could almost hear his eyes
rolling. i'd never seen him in such high spirits before.

he startled me, suddenly grabbing my hand, pressing
my palm to his face, and inhaling deeply.

"easier all the time," he muttered.

and then he was running.

if i'd ever feared death before in his presence, it was
nothing compared to how i felt now.

he streaked through the dark, thick underbrush of
the forest like a bullet, like a ghost. there was no
sound, no evidence that his feet touched the earth.
his breathing never changed, never indicated any
effort. but the trees flew by at deadly speeds, always
missing us by inches.

302 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i was too terrified to close my eyes, though the cool
forest air whipped against my face and burned them.
i felt as if i were stupidly sticking my head out the
window of an airplane in flight. and, for the first time
in my life, i felt the dizzy faintness of motion sickness.

then it was over. we'd hiked hours this morning to
reach edward's meadow, and now, in a matter of
minutes, we were back to the truck.

"exhilarating, isn't it?" his voice was high, excited. he
stood motionless, waiting for me to climb down. i
tried, but my muscles wouldn't respond. my arms and
legs stayed locked around him while my head spun
uncomfortably.

"bella?" he asked, anxious now.

"i think i need to lie down," i gasped.

"oh, sorry." he waited for me, but i still couldn't
move.

"i think i need help," i admitted.

he laughed quietly, and gently unloosened my
stranglehold on his neck. there was no resisting the
iron strength of his hands. then he pulled me around
to face him, cradling me in his arms like a small
child. he held me for a moment, then carefully placed
me on the springy ferns.

"how do you feel?" he asked.

i couldn't be sure how i felt when my head was
spinning so crazily.

303 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"dizzy, i think."

"put your head between your knees."

i tried that, and it helped a little. i breathed in and
out slowly, keeping my head very still. i felt him
sitting beside me. the moments passed, and
eventually i found that i could raise my head. there
was a hollow ringing sound in my ears.

"i guess that wasn't the best idea," he mused.

i tried to be positive, but my voice was weak. "no, it
was very interesting."

"hah! you're as white as a ghost - no, you're as
white as me!"

"i think i should have closed my eyes."

"remember that next time."

"next time!" i groaned.

he laughed, his mood still radiant.

"show-off," i muttered.

"open your eyes, bella," he said quietly.

and he was right there, his face so close to mine. his
beauty stunned my mind - it was too much, an
excess i couldn't grow accustomed to.

"i was thinking, while i was running" he paused.

"about not hitting the trees, i hope."

304 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"silly bella," he chuckled. "running is second nature
to me, it's not something i have to think about."

"show-off," i muttered again.

he smiled.

"no," he continued, "i was thinking there was
something i wanted to try." and he took my face in
his hands again.

i couldn't breathe.

he hesitated - not in the normal way, the human
way.

not the way a man might hesitate before he kissed a
woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how he would be
received. perhaps he would hesitate to prolong the
moment, that ideal moment of anticipation,
sometimes better than the kiss itself.

edward hesitated to test himself, to see if this was
safe, to make sure he was still in control of his need.

and then his cold, marble lips pressed very softly
against mine. what neither of us was prepared for
was my response.

blood boiled under my skin, burned in my lips. my
breath came in a wild gasp. my fingers knotted in his
hair, clutching him to me. my lips parted as i
breathed in his heady scent.

immediately i felt him turn to unresponsive stone
beneath my lips. his hands gently, but with

305 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
irresistible force, pushed my face back. i opened my
eyes and saw his guarded expression.

"oops," i breathed.

"that's an understatement."

his eyes were wild, his jaw clenched in acute
restraint, yet he didn't lapse from his perfect
articulation. he held my face just inches from his. he
dazzled my eyes.

"should i ?" i tried to disengage myself, to give him
some room. his hands refused to let me move so
much as an inch.

"no, it's tolerable. wait for a moment, please." his
voice was polite, controlled.

i kept my eyes on his, watched as the excitement in
them faded and gentled.

then he smiled a surprisingly impish grin.

"there," he said, obviously pleased with himself.

"tolerable?" i asked.

he laughed aloud. "i'm stronger than i thought. it's
nice to know."

"i wish i could say the same. i'm sorry."

"you are only human, after all."

"thanks so much," i said, my voice acerbic.

he was on his feet in one of his lithe, almost invisibly
quick movements. he held out his hand to me, an
306 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
unexpected gesture. i was so used to our standard of
careful non-contact. i took his icy hand, needing the
support more than i thought. my balance had not yet
returned.

"are you still faint from the run? or was it my kissing
expertise?" how lighthearted, how human he seemed
as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. he
was a different edward than the one i had known.
and i felt all the more besotted by him. it would cause
me physical pain to be separated from him now.

"i can't be sure, i'm still woozy," i managed to
respond. "i think it's some of both, though."

"maybe you should let me drive."

"are you insane?" i protested.

"i can drive better than you on your best day," he
teased. "you have much slower reflexes."

"i'm sure that's true, but i don't think my nerves, or
my truck, could take it."

"some trust, please, bella."

my hand was in my pocket, curled tightly around the
key. i pursed my lips, deliberated, then shook my
head with a tight grin.

"nope. not a chance."

he raised his eyebrows in disbelief.

i started to step around him, heading for the driver's
side. he might have let me pass if i hadn't wobbled

307 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
slightly. then again, he might not have. his arm
created an inescapable snare around my waist.

"bella, i've already expended a great deal of personal
effort at this point to keep you alive. i'm not about to
let you behind the wheel of a vehicle when you can't
even walk straight. besides, friends don't let friends
drive drunk," he quoted with a chuckle. i could smell
the unbearably sweet fragrance coming off his chest.

"drunk?" i objected.

"you're intoxicated by my very presence." he was
grinning that playful smirk again.

"i can't argue with that," i sighed. there was no way
around it; i couldn't resist him in anything. i held the
key high and dropped it, watching his hand flash like
lightning to catch it soundlessly. "take it easy - my
truck is a senior citizen."

"very sensible," he approved.

"and are you not affected at all?" i asked, irked. "by
my presence?" again his mobile features transformed,
his expression became soft, warm. he didn't answer
at first; he simply bent his face to mine, and brushed
his lips slowly along my jaw, from my ear to my chin,
back and forth. i trembled.

"regardless," he finally murmured, "i have better
reflexes."

308 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 mind over matter

he could drive well, when he kept the speed
reasonable, i had to admit. like so many things, it
seemed to be effortless to him. he barely looked at the
road, yet the tires never deviated so much as a
centimeter from the center of the lane. he drove one-
handed, holding my hand on the seat. sometimes he
gazed into the setting sun, sometimes he glanced at
me - my face, my hair blowing out the open window,
our hands twined together. he had turned the radio
to an oldies station, and he sang along with a song i'd
never heard. he knew every line.

"you like fifties music?" i asked.

"music in the fifties was good. much better than the
sixties, or the seventies, ugh!" he shuddered. "the
eighties were bearable."

"are you ever going to tell me how old you are?" i
asked, tentative, not wanting to upset his buoyant
humor.

"does it matter much?" his smile, to my relief,
remained unclouded.

"no, but i still wonder" i grimaced. "there's nothing
like an unsolved mystery to keep you up at night."

"i wonder if it will upset you," he reflected to himself.
he gazed into the sun; the minutes passed.

"try me," i finally said.
309 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he sighed, and then looked into my eyes, seeming to
forget the road completely for a time. whatever he
saw there must have encouraged him. he looked into
the sun - the light of the setting orb glittered off his
skin in ruby-tinged sparkles - and spoke.

"i was born in chicago in 1901." he paused and
glanced at me from the corner of his eyes. my face
was carefully unsurprised, patient for the rest. he
smiled a tiny smile and continued. "carlisle found me
in a hospital in the summer of 1918. i was seventeen,
and dying of the spanish influenza."

he heard my intake of breath, though it was barely
audible to my own ears. he looked down into my eyes
again.

"i don't remember it well - it was a very long time
ago, and human memories fade." he was lost in his
thoughts for a short time before he went on. "i do
remember how it felt, when carlisle saved me. it's not
an easy thing, not something you could forget."

"your parents?"

"they had already died from the disease. i was alone.
that was why he chose me. in all the chaos of the
epidemic, no one would ever realize i was gone."

"how did he save you?"

a few seconds passed before he answered. he seemed
to choose his words carefully.

"it was difficult. not many of us have the restraint
necessary to accomplish it. but carlisle has always
been the most humane, the most compassionate of
310 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
us i don't think you could find his equal throughout
all of history." he paused. "for me, it was merely very,
very painful." i could tell from the set of his lips, he
would say no more on this subject. i suppressed my
curiosity, though it was far from idle. there were
many things i needed to think through on this
particular issue, things that were only beginning to
occur to me. no doubt his quick mind had already
comprehended every aspect that eluded me.

his soft voice interrupted my thoughts. "he acted
from loneliness. that's usually the reason behind the
choice. i was the first in carlisle's family, though he
found esme soon after. she fell from a cliff. they
brought her straight to the hospital morgue, though,
somehow, her heart was still beating."

"so you must be dying, then, to become" we never
said the word, and i couldn't frame it now.

"no, that's just carlisle. he would never do that to
someone who had another choice." the respect in his
voice was profound whenever he spoke of his father
figure. "it is easier he says, though," he continued, "if
the blood is weak." he looked at the now-dark road,
and i could feel the subject closing again.

"and emmett and rosalie?"

"carlisle brought rosalie to our family next. i didn't
realize till much later that he was hoping she would
be to me what esme was to him - he was careful
with his thoughts around me." he rolled his eyes.
"but she was never more than a sister. it was only
two years later that she found emmett. she was
hunting - we were in appalachia at the time - and
311 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
found a bear about to finish him off. she carried him
back to carlisle, more than a hundred miles, afraid
she wouldn't be able to do it herself. i'm only
beginning to guess how difficult that journey was for
her." he threw a pointed glance in my direction, and
raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my
cheek with the back of his hand.

"but she made it," i encouraged, looking away from
the unbearable beauty of his eyes.

"yes," he murmured. "she saw something in his face
that made her strong enough. and they've been
together ever since. sometimes they live separately
from us, as a married couple. but the younger we
pretend to be, the longer we can stay in any given
place. forks seemed perfect, so we all enrolled in high
school." he laughed. "i suppose we'll have to go to
their wedding in a few years, again."

"alice and jasper?"

"alice and jasper are two very rare creatures. they
both developed a conscience, as we refer to it, with no
outside guidance. jasper belonged to another
family, a very different kind of family. he became
depressed, and he wandered on his own. alice found
him. like me, she has certain gifts above and beyond
the norm for our kind."

"really?" i interrupted, fascinated. "but you said you
were the only one who could hear people's thoughts."

"that's true. she knows other things. she sees things
- things that might happen, things that are coming.

312 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
but it's very subjective. the future isn't set in stone.
things change."

his jaw set when he said that, and his eyes darted to
my face and away so quickly that i wasn't sure if i
only imagined it.

"what kinds of things does she see?"

"she saw jasper and knew that he was looking for her
before he knew it himself. she saw carlisle and our
family, and they came together to find us. she's most
sensitive to non-humans. she always sees, for
example, when another group of our kind is coming
near. and any threat they may pose."

"are there a lot of your kind?" i was surprised. how
many of them could walk among us undetected?

"no, not many. but most won't settle in any one
place. only those like us, who've given up hunting
you people" - a sly glance in my direction -

"can live together with humans for any length of time.
we've only found one other family like ours, in a small
village in alaska. we lived together for a time, but
there were so many of us that we became too
noticeable. those of us who live differently tend to
band together."

"and the others?"

"nomads, for the most part. we've all lived that way at
times. it gets tedious, like anything else. but we run
across the others now and then, because most of us
prefer the north."

313 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why is that?"

we were parked in front of my house now, and he'd
turned off the truck. it was very quiet and dark; there
was no moon. the porch light was off so i knew my
father wasn't home yet.

"did you have your eyes open this afternoon?" he
teased. "do you think i could walk down the street in
the sunlight without causing traffic accidents?
there's a reason why we chose the olympic
peninsula, one of the most sunless places in the
world. it's nice to be able to go outside in the day. you
wouldn't believe how tired you can get of nighttime in
eighty-odd years."

"so that's where the legends came from?"

"probably."

"and alice came from another family, like jasper?"

"no, and that is a mystery. alice doesn't remember
her human life at all. and she doesn't know who
created her. she awoke alone. whoever made her
walked away, and none of us understand why, or
how, he could. if she hadn't had that other sense, if
she hadn't seen jasper and carlisle and known that
she would someday become one of us, she probably
would have turned into a total savage."

there was so much to think through, so much i still
wanted to ask. but, to my great embarrassment, my
stomach growled. i'd been so intrigued, i hadn't even
noticed i was hungry. i realized now that i was
ravenous.

314 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm sorry, i'm keeping you from dinner."

"i'm fine, really."

"i've never spent much time around anyone who eats
food. i forget."

"i want to stay with you." it was easier to say in the
darkness, knowing as i spoke how my voice would
betray me, my hopeless addiction to him.

"can't i come in?" he asked.

"would you like to?" i couldn't picture it, this godlike
creature sitting in my father's shabby kitchen chair.

"yes, if it's all right." i heard the door close quietly,
and almost simultaneously he was outside my door,
opening it for me.

"very human," i complimented him.

"it's definitely resurfacing."

he walked beside me in the night, so quietly i had to
peek at him constantly to be sure he was still there.
in the darkness he looked much more normal. still
pale, still dreamlike in his beauty, but no longer the
fantastic sparkling creature of our sunlit afternoon.

he reached the door ahead of me and opened it for
me. i paused halfway through the frame.

"the door was unlocked?"

"no, i used the key from under the eave."

315 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i stepped inside, flicked on the porch light, and
turned to look at him with my eyebrows raised. i was
sure i'd never used that key in front of him.

"i was curious about you."

"you spied on me?" but somehow i couldn't infuse my
voice with the proper outrage. i was flattered.

he was unrepentant. "what else is there to do at
night?" i let it go for the moment and went down the
hall to the kitchen. he was there before me, needing
no guide. he sat in the very chair i'd tried to picture
him in. his beauty lit up the kitchen. it was a
moment before i could look away.

i concentrated on getting my dinner, taking last
night's lasagna from the fridge, placing a square on a
plate, heating it in the microwave. it revolved, filling
the kitchen with the smell of tomatoes and oregano. i
didn't take my eyes from the plate of food as i spoke.

"how often?" i asked casually.

"hmmm?" he sounded as if i had pulled him from
some other train of thought.

i still didn't turn around. "how often did you come
here?"

"i come here almost every night."

i whirled, stunned. "why?"

"you're interesting when you sleep." he spoke matter-
of-factly. "you talk."

316 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no!" i gasped, heat flooding my face all the way to my
hairline. i gripped the kitchen counter for support. i
knew i talked in my sleep, of course; my mother
teased me about it. i hadn't thought it was something
i needed to worry about here, though.

his expression shifted instantly to chagrin. "are you
very angry with me?"

"that depends!" i felt and sounded like i'd had the
breath knocked out of me.

he waited.

"on?" he urged.

"what you heard!" i wailed.

instantly, silently, he was at my side, taking my
hands carefully in his.

"don't be upset!" he pleaded. he dropped his face to
the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. i was
embarrassed. i tried to look away.

"you miss your mother," he whispered. "you worry
about her. and when it rains, the sound makes you
restless. you used to talk about home a lot, but it's
less often now. once you said, 'it's too green.'" he
laughed softly, hoping, i could see, not to offend me
further.

"anything else?" i demanded.

he knew what i was getting at. "you did say my
name," he admitted. i sighed in defeat. "a lot?"

"how much do you mean by 'a lot,' exactly?"
317 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh no!" i hung my head.

he pulled me against his chest, softly, naturally.

"don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear. "if i
could dream at all, it would be about you. and i'm not
ashamed of it." then we both heard the sound of tires
on the brick driveway, saw the headlights flash
through the front windows, down the hall to us. i
stiffened in his arms.

"should your father know i'm here?" he asked.

"i'm not sure" i tried to think it through quickly.

"another time then"

and i was alone.

"edward!" i hissed.

i heard a ghostly chuckle, then nothing else.

my father's key turned in the door.

"bella?" he called. it had bothered me before; who else
would it be?

suddenly he didn't seem so far off base.

"in here." i hoped he couldn't hear the hysterical edge
to my voice. i grabbed my dinner from the microwave
and sat at the table as he walked in. his footsteps
sounded so noisy after my day with edward.

"can you get me some of that? i'm bushed." he
stepped on the heels of his boots to take them off,
holding the back of edward's chair for support. i took
my food with me, scarfing it down as i got his dinner.
318 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it burned my tongue. i filled two glasses with milk
while his lasagna was heating, and gulped mine to
put out the fire. as i set the glass down, i noticed the
milk trembling and realized my hand was shaking.
charlie sat in the chair, and the contrast between
him and its former occupant was comical.

"thanks," he said as i placed his food on the table.

"how was your day?" i asked. the words were rushed;
i was dying to escape to my room.

"good. the fish were biting how about you? did you
get everything done that you wanted to?"

"not really - it was too nice out to stay indoors." i
took another big bite.

"it was a nice day," he agreed. what an
understatement, i thought to myself.

finished with the last bite of lasagna, i lifted my glass
and chugged the remains of my milk.

charlie surprised me by being observant. "in a
hurry?"

"yeah, i'm tired. i'm going to bed early."

"you look kinda keyed up," he noted. why, oh why,
did this have to be his night to pay attention?

"do i?" was all i could manage in response. i quickly
scrubbed my dishes clean in the sink, and placed
them upside down on a dish towel to dry.

"it's saturday," he mused.

319 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i didn't respond.

"no plans tonight?" he asked suddenly.

"no, dad, i just want to get some sleep."

"none of the boys in town your type, eh?" he was
suspicious, but trying to play it cool.

"no, none of the boys have caught my eye yet." i was
careful not to over-emphasize the word boys in my
quest to be truthful with charlie.

"i thought maybe that mike newton you said he was
friendly."

"he's just a friend, dad."

"well, you're too good for them all, anyway. wait till
you get to college to start looking." every father's
dream, that his daughter will be out of the house
before the hormones kick in.

"sounds like a good idea to me," i agreed as i headed
up the stairs.

"'night, honey," he called after me. no doubt he would
be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me to try
to sneak out.

"see you in the morning, dad." see you creeping into
my room tonight at midnight to check on me.

i worked to make my tread sound slow and tired as i
walked up the stairs to my room. i shut the door loud
enough for him to hear, and then sprinted on my
tiptoes to the window. i threw it open and leaned out

320 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
into the night. my eyes scanned the darkness, the
impenetrable shadows of the trees.

"edward?" i whispered, feeling completely idiotic. the
quiet, laughing response came from behind me.
"yes?" i whirled, one hand flying to my throat in
surprise.

he lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands
behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the
picture of ease.

"oh!" i breathed, sinking unsteadily to the floor.

"i'm sorry." he pressed his lips together, trying to hide
his amusement.

"just give me a minute to restart my heart."

he sat up slowly, so as not to startle me again. then
he leaned forward and reached out with his long arms
to pick me up, gripping the tops of my arms like i was
a toddler. he sat me on the bed beside him.

"why don't you sit with me," he suggested, putting a
cold hand on mine.

"how's the heart?"

"you tell me - i'm sure you hear it better than i do." i
felt his quiet laughter shake the bed.

we sat there for a moment in silence, both listening to
my heartbeat slow. i thought about having edward in
my room, with my father in the house.

"can i have a minute to be human?" i asked.

321 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"certainly." he gestured with one hand that i should
proceed.

"stay," i said, trying to look severe.

"yes, ma'am." and he made a show of becoming a
statue on the edge of my bed.

i hopped up, grabbing my pajamas from off the floor,
my bag of toiletries off the desk. i left the light off and
slipped out, closing the door. i could hear the sound
from the tv rising up the stairs. i banged the
bathroom door loudly, so charlie wouldn't come up to
bother me. i meant to hurry. i brushed my teeth
fiercely, trying to be thorough and speedy, removing
all traces of lasagna. but the hot water of the shower
couldn't be rushed. it unknotted the muscles in my
back, calmed my pulse. the familiar smell of my
shampoo made me feel like i might be the same
person i had been this morning. i tried not to think of
edward, sitting in my room, waiting, because then i
had to start all over with the calming process. finally,
i couldn't delay anymore. i shut off the water,
toweling hastily, rushing again. i pulled on my holey
t-shirt and gray sweatpants. too late to regret not
packing the victoria's secret silk pajamas my mother
got me two birthdays ago, which still had the tags on
them in a drawer somewhere back home.

i rubbed the towel through my hair again, and then
yanked the brush through it quickly. i threw the
towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste
into my bag. then i dashed down the stairs so charlie
could see that i was in my pajamas, with wet hair.

"'night, dad."
322 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"'night, bella." he did look startled by my appearance.
maybe that would keep him from checking on me
tonight.

i took the stairs two at a time, trying to be quiet, and
flew into my room, closing the door tightly behind me.

edward hadn't moved a fraction of an inch, a carving
of adonis perched on my faded quilt. i smiled, and his
lips twitched, the statue coming to life.

his eyes appraised me, taking in the damp hair, the
tattered shirt. he raised one eyebrow. "nice."

i grimaced.

"no, it looks good on you."

"thanks," i whispered. i went back to his side, sitting
cross-legged beside him. i looked at the lines in the
wooden floor.

"what was all that for?"

"charlie thinks i'm sneaking out."

"oh." he contemplated that. "why?" as if he couldn't
know charlie's mind much more clearly than i could
guess.

"apparently, i look a little overexcited."

he lifted my chin, examining my face.

"you look very warm, actually."

he bent his face slowly to mine, laying his cool cheek
against my skin. i held perfectly still.

323 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"mmmmmm" he breathed.

it was very difficult, while he was touching me, to
frame a coherent question. it took me a minute of
scattered concentration to begin.

"it seems to be much easier for you, now, to be
close to me."

"does it seem that way to you?" he murmured, his
nose gliding to the corner of my jaw. i felt his hand,
lighter than a moth's wing, brushing my damp hair
back, so that his lips could touch the hollow beneath
my ear.

"much, much easier," i said, trying to exhale.

"hmm."

"so i was wondering" i began again, but his fingers
were slowly tracing my collarbone, and i lost my train
of thought.

"yes?" he breathed.

"why is that," my voice shook, embarrassing me, "do
you think?" i felt the tremor of his breath on my neck
as he laughed. "mind over matter."

i pulled back; as i moved, he froze - and i could no
longer hear the sound of his breathing.

we stared cautiously at each other for a moment, and
then, as his clenched jaw gradually relaxed, his
expression became puzzled.

"did i do something wrong?"

324 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no - the opposite. you're driving me crazy," i
explained. he considered that briefly, and when he
spoke, he sounded pleased.

"really?" a triumphant smile slowly lit his face.

"would you like a round of applause?" i asked
sarcastically. he grinned.

"i'm just pleasantly surprised," he clarified. "in the
last hundred years or so," his voice was teasing, "i
never imagined anything like this. i didn't believe i
would ever find someone i wanted to be with in
another way than my brothers and sisters. and then
to find, even though it's all new to me, that i'm good
at it at being with you"

"you're good at everything," i pointed out.

he shrugged, allowing that, and we both laughed in
whispers.

"but how can it be so easy now?" i pressed. "this
afternoon"

"it's not easy," he sighed. "but this afternoon, i was
still undecided. i am sorry about that, it was
unforgivable for me to behave so."

"not unforgivable," i disagreed.

"thank you." he smiled. "you see," he continued,
looking down now, "i wasn't sure if i was strong
enough" he picked up one of my hands and pressed
it lightly to his face. "and while there was still that
possibility that i might be overcome" - he breathed
in the scent at my wrist - "i was susceptible. until
325 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i made up my mind that i was strong enough, that
there was no possibility at all that i would that i
ever could"

i'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. it was
so human.

"so there's no possibility now?"

"mind over matter," he repeated, smiling, his teeth
bright even in the darkness.

"wow, that was easy," i said.

he threw back his head and laughed, quietly as a
whisper, but still exuberantly.

"easy for you!" he amended, touching my nose with
his fingertip. and then his face was abruptly serious.

"i'm trying," he whispered, his voice pained. "if it gets
to be too much, i'm fairly sure i'll be able to leave."

i scowled. i didn't like the talk of leaving.

"and it will be harder tomorrow," he continued. "i've
had the scent of you in my head all day, and i've
grown amazingly desensitized. if i'm away from you
for any length of time, i'll have to start over again. not
quite from scratch, though, i think."

"don't go away, then," i responded, unable to hide the
longing in my voice.

"that suits me," he replied, his face relaxing into a
gentle smile.

326 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bring on the shackles - i'm your prisoner." but his
long hands formed manacles around my wrists as he
spoke. he laughed his quiet, musical laugh. he'd
laughed more tonight than i'd ever heard in all the
time i'd spent with him.

"you seem more optimistic than usual," i observed.
"i haven't seen you like this before."

"isn't it supposed to be like this?" he smiled. "the
glory of first love, and all that. it's incredible, isn't it,
the difference between reading about something,
seeing it in the pictures, and experiencing it?"

"very different," i agreed. "more forceful than i'd
imagined."

"for example" - his words flowed swiftly now, i had
to concentrate to catch it all - "the emotion of
jealousy. i've read about it a hundred thousand times,
seen actors portray it in a thousand different plays
and movies. i believed i understood that one pretty
clearly. but it shocked me" he grimaced. "do you
remember the day that mike asked you to the dance?"

i nodded, though i remembered that day for a
different reason. "the day you started talking to me
again."

"i was surprised by the flare of resentment, almost
fury, that i felt - i didn't recognize what it was at
first. i was even more aggravated than usual that i
couldn't know what you were thinking, why you
refused him. was it simply for your friend's sake?
was there someone else? i knew i had no right to care
either way. i tried not to care.
327 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and then the line started forming," he chuckled. i
scowled in the darkness.

"i waited, unreasonably anxious to hear what you
would say to them, to watch your expressions. i
couldn't deny the relief i felt, watching the annoyance
on your face. but i couldn't be sure.

"that was the first night i came here. i wrestled all
night, while watching you sleep, with the chasm
between what i knew was right, moral, ethical, and
what i wanted. i knew that if i continued to ignore
you as i should, or if i left for a few years, till you
were gone, that someday you would say yes to mike,
or someone like him. it made me angry.

"and then," he whispered, "as you were sleeping, you
said my name. you spoke so clearly, at first i thought
you'd woken. but you rolled over restlessly and
mumbled my name once more, and sighed. the
feeling that coursed through me then was unnerving,
staggering. and i knew i couldn't ignore you any
longer." he was silent for a moment, probably
listening to the suddenly uneven pounding of my
heart.

"but jealousy it's a strange thing. so much more
powerful than i would have thought. and irrational!
just now, when charlie asked you about that vile
mike newton" he shook his head angrily.

"i should have known you'd be listening," i groaned.

"of course."

"that made you feel jealous, though, really?"

328 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm new at this; you're resurrecting the human in
me, and everything feels stronger because it's fresh."

"but honestly," i teased, "for that to bother you, after i
have to hear that rosalie - rosalie, the incarnation
of pure beauty, rosalie - was meant for you. emmett
or no emmett, how can i compete with that?"

"there's no competition." his teeth gleamed. he drew
my trapped hands around his back, holding me to his
chest. i kept as still as i could, even breathing with
caution.

"i know there's no competition," i mumbled into his
cold skin. "that's the problem."

"of course rosalie is beautiful in her way, but even if
she wasn't like a sister to me, even if emmett didn't
belong with her, she could never have one tenth, no,
one hundredth of the attraction you hold for me." he
was serious now, thoughtful. "for almost ninety years
i've walked among my kind, and yours all the time
thinking i was complete in myself, not realizing what i
was seeking. and not finding anything, because you
weren't alive yet."

"it hardly seems fair," i whispered, my face still
resting on his chest, listening to his breath come and
go. "i haven't had to wait at all. why should i get off
so easily?"

"you're right," he agreed with amusement. "i should
make this harder for you, definitely." he freed one of
his hands, released my wrist, only to gather it
carefully into his other hand. he stroked my wet hair
softly, from the top of my head to my waist. "you only
329 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
have to risk your life every second you spend with me,
that's surely not much. you only have to turn your
back on nature, on humanity what's that worth?"

"very little - i don't feel deprived of anything."

"not yet." and his voice was abruptly full of ancient
grief. i tried to pull back, to look in his face, but his
hand locked my wrists in an unbreakable hold.

"what -" i started to ask, when his body became
alert. i froze, but he suddenly released my hands, and
disappeared. i narrowly avoided falling on my face.

"lie down!" he hissed. i couldn't tell where he spoke
from in the darkness.

i rolled under my quilt, balling up on my side, the
way i usually slept. i heard the door crack open, as
charlie peeked in to make sure i was where i was
supposed to be. i breathed evenly, exaggerating the
movement. a long minute passed. i listened, not sure
if i'd heard the door close. then edward's cool arm
was around me, under the covers, his lips at my ear.

"you are a terrible actress - i'd say that career path
is out for you."

"darn it," i muttered. my heart was crashing in my
chest. he hummed a melody i didn't recognize; it
sounded like a lullaby. he paused. "should i sing you
to sleep?"

"right," i laughed. "like i could sleep with you here!"

"you do it all the time," he reminded me.

330 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"but i didn't know you were here," i replied icily.

"so if you don't want to sleep" he suggested,
ignoring my tone. my breath caught.

"if i don't want to sleep ?"

he chuckled. "what do you want to do then?"

i couldn't answer at first.

"i'm not sure," i finally said.

"tell me when you decide."

i could feel his cool breath on my neck, feel his nose
sliding along my jaw, inhaling.

"i thought you were desensitized."

"just because i'm resisting the wine doesn't mean i
can't appreciate the bouquet," he whispered. "you
have a very floral smell, like lavender or freesia," he
noted. "it's mouthwatering."

"yeah, it's an off day when i don't get somebody
telling me how edible i smell."

he chuckled, and then sighed.

"i've decided what i want to do," i told him. "i want to
hear more about you."

"ask me anything."

i sifted through my questions for the most vital. "why
do you do it?" i said. "i still don't understand how you
can work so hard to resist what you are. please
don't misunderstand, of course i'm glad that you do. i
331 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
just don't see why you would bother in the first
place." he hesitated before answering. "that's a good
question, and you are not the first one to ask it. the
others - the majority of our kind who are quite
content with our lot - they, too, wonder at how we
live. but you see, just because we've been dealt a
certain hand it doesn't mean that we can't choose
to rise above - to conquer the boundaries of a
destiny that none of us wanted. to try to retain
whatever essential humanity we can."

i lay unmoving, locked in awed silence.

"did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few
minutes.

"no."

"is that all you were curious about?"

i rolled my eyes. "not quite."

"what else do you want to know?"

"why can you read minds - why only you? and alice,
seeing the future why does that happen?"

i felt him shrug in the darkness. "we don't really
know. carlisle has a theory he believes that we all
bring something of our strongest human traits with
us into the next life, where they are intensified - like
our minds, and our senses. he thinks that i must
have already been very sensitive to the thoughts of
those around me. and that alice had some
precognition, wherever she was."

"what did he bring into the next life, and the others?"
332 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"carlisle brought his compassion. esme brought her
ability to love passionately. emmett brought his
strength, rosalie her tenacity. or you could call it
pigheadedness." he chuckled. "jasper is very
interesting. he was quite charismatic in his first life,
able to influence those around him to see things his
way. now he is able to manipulate the emotions of
those around him - calm down a room of angry
people, for example, or excite a lethargic crowd,
conversely. it's a very subtle gift."

i considered the impossibilities he described, trying to
take it in. he waited patiently while i thought.

"so where did it all start? i mean, carlisle changed
you, and then someone must have changed him, and
so on"

"well, where did you come from? evolution? creation?
couldn't we have evolved in the same way as other
species, predator and prey? or, if you don't believe
that all this world could have just happened on its
own, which is hard for me to accept myself, is it so
hard to believe that the same force that created the
delicate angelfish with the shark, the baby seal and
the killer whale, could create both our kinds
together?"

"let me get this straight - i'm the baby seal, right?"

"right." he laughed, and something touched my hair
- his lips?

i wanted to turn toward him, to see if it was really his
lips against my hair. but i had to be good; i didn't

333 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
want to make this any harder for him than it already
was.

"are you ready to sleep?" he asked, interrupting the
short silence. "or do you have any more questions?"

"only a million or two."

"we have tomorrow, and the next day, and the next"
he reminded me. i smiled, euphoric at the thought.

"are you sure you won't vanish in the morning?" i
wanted this to be certain. "you are mythical, after all."

"i won't leave you." his voice had the seal of a promise
in it.

"one more, then, tonight" and i blushed. the
darkness was no help - i'm sure he could feel the
sudden warmth under my skin.

"what is it?"

"no, forget it. i changed my mind."

"bella, you can ask me anything."

i didn't answer, and he groaned.

"i keep thinking it will get less frustrating, not hearing
your thoughts. but it just gets worse and worse."

"i'm glad you can't read my thoughts. it's bad enough
that you eavesdrop on my sleep-talking."

"please?" his voice was so persuasive, so impossible
to resist. i shook my head.

334 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"if you don't tell me, i'll just assume it's something
much worse than it is," he threatened darkly.
"please?" again, that pleading voice.

"well," i began, glad that he couldn't see my face.

"yes?"

"you said that rosalie and emmett will get married
soon is that

marriage the same as it is for humans?"

he laughed in earnest now, understanding. "is that
what you're getting at?"

i fidgeted, unable to answer.

"yes, i suppose it is much the same," he said. "i told
you, most of those human desires are there, just
hidden behind more powerful desires."

"oh," was all i could say.

"was there a purpose behind your curiosity?"

"well, i did wonder about you and me someday"
he was instantly serious, i could tell by the sudden
stillness of his body. i froze, too, reacting
automatically.

"i don't think that that would be possible for us."

"because it would be too hard for you, if i were that
close?"

"that's certainly a problem. but that's not what i was
thinking of. it's just that you are so soft, so fragile. i
have to mind my actions every moment that we're
335 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
together so that i don't hurt you. i could kill you quite
easily, bella, simply by accident." his voice had
become just a soft murmur. he moved his icy palm to
rest it against my cheek. "if i was too hasty if for
one second i wasn't paying enough attention, i could
reach out, meaning to touch your face, and crush
your skull by mistake. you don't realize how
incredibly breakable you are. i can never, never afford
to lose any kind of control when i'm with you." he
waited for me to respond, growing anxious when i
didn't. "are you scared?" he asked.

i waited for a minute to answer, so the words would
be true. "no. i'm fine."

he seemed to deliberate for a moment. "i'm curious
now, though," he said, his voice light again. "have you
ever ?" he trailed off suggestively.

"of course not." i flushed. "i told you i've never felt
like this about anyone before, not even close."

"i know. it's just that i know other people's thoughts.
i know love and lust don't always keep the same
company."

"they do for me. now, anyway, that they exist for me
at all," i sighed.

"that's nice. we have that one thing in common, at
least." he sounded satisfied.

"your human instincts" i began. he waited. "well,
do you find me attractive, in that way, at all?"

he laughed and lightly rumpled my nearly dry hair.

336 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i may not be a human, but i am a man," he assured
me. i yawned involuntarily.

"i've answered your questions, now you should sleep,"
he insisted.

"i'm not sure if i can."

"do you want me to leave?"

"no!" i said too loudly.

he laughed, and then began to hum that same,
unfamiliar lullaby; the voice of an archangel, soft in
my ear.

more tired than i realized, exhausted from the long
day of mental and emotional stress like i'd never felt
before, i drifted to sleep in his cold arms.

337 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 the cullens

the muted light of yet another cloudy day eventually
woke me. i lay with my arm across my eyes, groggy
and dazed. something, a dream trying to be
remembered, struggled to break into my
consciousness. i moaned and rolled on my side,
hoping more sleep would come. and then the previous
day flooded back into my awareness.

"oh!" i sat up so fast it made my head spin.

"your hair looks like a haystack but i like it." his
unruffled voice came from the rocking chair in the
corner.

"edward! you stayed!" i rejoiced, and thoughtlessly
threw myself across the room and into his lap. in the
instant that my thoughts caught up with my actions,
i froze, shocked by my own uncontrolled enthusiasm.
i stared up at him, afraid that i had crossed the
wrong line.

but he laughed.

"of course," he answered, startled, but seeming
pleased by my reaction. his hands rubbed my back.

i laid my head cautiously against his shoulder,
breathing in the smell of his skin.

"i was sure it was a dream."

"you're not that creative," he scoffed.

338 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"charlie!" i remembered, thoughtlessly jumping up
again and heading to the door.

"he left an hour ago - after reattaching your battery
cables, i might add. i have to admit i was
disappointed. is that really all it would take to stop
you, if you were determined to go?"

i deliberated where i stood, wanting to return to him
badly, but afraid i might have morning breath.

"you're not usually this confused in the morning," he
noted. he held his arms open for me to return. a
nearly irresistible invitation.

"i need another human minute," i admitted.

"i'll wait."

i skipped to the bathroom, my emotions
unrecognizable. i didn't know myself, inside or out.
the face in the mirror was practically a stranger

- eyes too bright, hectic spots of red across my
cheekbones. after i brushed my teeth, i worked to
straighten out the tangled chaos that was my hair. i
splashed my face with cold water, and tried to breathe
normally, with no noticeable success. i half-ran back
to my room. it seemed like a miracle that he was
there, his arms still waiting for me. he reached out to
me, and my heart thumped unsteadily.

"welcome back," he murmured, taking me into his
arms. he rocked me for a while in silence, until i
noticed that his clothes were changed, his hair
smooth.

339 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you left?" i accused, touching the collar of his fresh
shirt.

"i could hardly leave in the clothes i came in - what
would the neighbors think?"

i pouted.

"you were very deeply asleep; i didn't miss anything."
his eyes gleamed.

"the talking came earlier."

i groaned. "what did you hear?"

his gold eyes grew very soft. "you said you loved me."

"you knew that already," i reminded him, ducking my
head.

"it was nice to hear, just the same."

i hid my face against his shoulder.

"i love you," i whispered.

"you are my life now," he answered simply.

there was nothing more to say for the moment. he
rocked us back and forth as the room grew lighter.

"breakfast time," he said eventually, casually - to
prove, i'm sure, that he remembered all my human
frailties.

so i clutched my throat with both hands and stared
at him with wide eyes. shock crossed his face.

340 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"kidding!" i snickered. "and you said i couldn't act!"
he frowned in disgust. "that wasn't funny."

"it was very funny, and you know it." but i examined
his gold eyes carefully, to make sure that i was
forgiven. apparently, i was.

"shall i rephrase?" he asked. "breakfast time for the
human."

"oh, okay."

he threw me over his stone shoulder, gently, but with
a swiftness that left me breathless. i protested as he
carried me easily down the stairs, but he ignored me.
he sat me right side up on a chair.

the kitchen was bright, happy, seeming to absorb my
mood.

"what's for breakfast?" i asked pleasantly.

that threw him for a minute.

"er, i'm not sure. what would you like?" his marble
brow puckered. i grinned, hopping up.

"that's all right, i fend for myself pretty well. watch
me hunt." i found a bowl and a box of cereal. i could
feel his eyes on me as i poured the milk and grabbed
a spoon. i sat my food on the table, and then paused.

"can i get you anything?" i asked, not wanting to be
rude. he rolled his eyes. "just eat, bella."

i sat at the table, watching him as i took a bite. he
was gazing at me, studying my every movement. it

341 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
made me self-conscious. i cleared my mouth to speak,
to distract him.

"what's on the agenda for today?" i asked.

"hmmm" i watched him frame his answer carefully.
"what would you say to meeting my family?"

i gulped.

"are you afraid now?" he sounded hopeful.

"yes," i admitted; how could i deny it - he could see
my eyes.

"don't worry." he smirked. "i'll protect you."

"i'm not afraid of them," i explained. "i'm afraid they
won't like me. won't they be, well, surprised that
you would bring someone like me

home to meet them? do they know that i know about
them?"

"oh, they already know everything. they'd taken bets
yesterday, you know"

- he smiled, but his voice was harsh - "on whether
i'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet
against alice, i can't imagine. at any rate, we don't
have secrets in the family. it's not really feasible, what
with my mind reading and alice seeing the future and
all that."

"and jasper making you feel all warm and fuzzy
about spilling your guts, don't forget that."

"you paid attention," he smiled approvingly.

342 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i've been known to do that every now and then." i
grimaced. "so did alice see me coming?"

his reaction was strange. "something like that," he
said uncomfortably, turning away so i couldn't see his
eyes. i stared at him curiously.

"is that any good?" he asked, turning back to me
abruptly and eyeing my breakfast with a teasing look
on his face. "honestly, it doesn't look very appetizing."

"well, it's no irritable grizzly" i murmured, ignoring
him when he glowered. i was still wondering why he
responded that way when i mentioned alice. i hurried
through my cereal, speculating. he stood in the
middle of the kitchen, the statue of adonis again,
staring abstractedly out the back windows.

then his eyes were back on me, and he smiled his
heartbreaking smile.

"and you should introduce me to your father, too, i
think."

"he already knows you," i reminded him.

"as your boyfriend, i mean."

i stared at him with suspicion. "why?"

"isn't that customary?" he asked innocently.

"i don't know," i admitted. my dating history gave me
few reference points to work with. not that any
normal rules of dating applied here.

"that's not necessary, you know. i don't expect you
to i mean, you don't have to pretend for me."
343 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
his smile was patient. "i'm not pretending."

i pushed the remains of my cereal around the edges
of the bowl, biting my lip.

"are you going to tell charlie i'm your boyfriend or
not?" he demanded.

"is that what you are?" i suppressed my internal
cringing at the thought of edward and charlie and
the word boy friend all in the same room at the same
time.

"it's a loose interpretation of the word 'boy,' i'll admit."

"i was under the impression that you were something
more, actually," i confessed, looking at the table.

"well, i don't know if we need to give him all the gory
details." he reached across the table to lift my chin
with a cold, gentle finger. "but he will need some
explanation for why i'm around here so much. i don't
want chief swan getting a restraining order put on
me."

"will you be?" i asked, suddenly anxious. "will you
really be here?"

"as long as you want me," he assured me.

"i'll always want you," i warned him. "forever." he
walked slowly around the table, and, pausing a few
feet away, he reached out to touch his fingertips to
my cheek. his expression was unfathomable.

"does that make you sad?" i asked.

344 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he didn't answer. he stared into my eyes for an
immeasurable period of time.

"are you finished?" he finally asked.

i jumped up. "yes."

"get dressed - i'll wait here."

it was hard to decide what to wear. i doubted there
were any etiquette books detailing how to dress when
your vampire sweetheart takes you home to meet his
vampire family. it was a relief to think the word to
myself. i knew i shied away from it intentionally.

i ended up in my only skirt - long, khaki-colored,
still casual. i put on the dark blue blouse he'd once
complimented. a quick glance in the mirror told me
my hair was entirely impossible, so i pulled it back
into a pony tail.

"okay." i bounced down the stairs. "i'm decent." he
was waiting at the foot of the stairs, closer than i'd
thought, and i bounded right into him. he steadied
me, holding me a careful distance away for a few
seconds before suddenly pulling me closer.

"wrong again," he murmured in my ear. "you are
utterly indecent - no one should look so tempting,
it's not fair."

"tempting how?" i asked. "i can change" he sighed,
shaking his head. "you are so absurd." he pressed his
cool lips delicately to my forehead, and the room
spun. the smell of his breath made it impossible to
think.

345 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"shall i explain how you are tempting me?" he said. it
was clearly a rhetorical question. his fingers traced
slowly down my spine, his breath coming more
quickly against my skin. my hands were limp on his
chest, and i felt lightheaded again. he tilted his head
slowly and touched his cool lips to mine for the
second time, very carefully, parting them slightly. and
then i collapsed.

"bella?" his voice was alarmed as he caught me and
held me up.

"you made me faint," i accused him dizzily.

"what am i going to do with you?" he groaned in
exasperation. "yesterday i kiss you, and you attack
me! today you pass out on me!" i laughed weakly,
letting his arms support me while my head spun.

"so much for being good at everything," he sighed.

"that's the problem." i was still dizzy. "you're too
good. far, far too good."

"do you feel sick?" he asked; he'd seen me like this
before.

"no - that wasn't the same kind of fainting at all. i
don't know what happened." i shook my head
apologeticallv, "i think i forgot to breathe."

"i can't take you anywhere like this."

"i'm fine," i insisted. "your family is going to think i'm
insane anyway, what's the difference?"

346 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he measured my expression for a moment. "i'm very
partial to that color with your skin," he offered
unexpectedly. i flushed with pleasure, and looked
away.

"look, i'm trying really hard not to think about what
i'm about to do, so can we go already?" i asked.

"and you're worried, not because you're headed to
meet a houseful of vampires, but because you think
those vampires won't approve of you, correct?"

"that's right," i answered immediately, hiding my
surprise at his casual use of the word.

he shook his head. "you're incredible."

i realized, as he drove my truck out of the main part
of town, that i had no idea where he lived. we passed
over the bridge at the calawah river, the road
winding northward, the houses flashing past us
growing farther apart, getting bigger. and then we
were past the other houses altogether, driving
through misty forest. i was trying to decide whether to
ask or be patient, when he turned abruptly onto an
unpaved road. it was unmarked, barely visible among
the ferns. the forest encroached on both sides,
leaving the road ahead only discernible for a few
meters as it twisted, serpentlike, around the ancient
trees.

and then, after a few miles, there was some thinning
of the woods, and we were suddenly in a small
meadow, or was it actually a lawn? the gloom of the
forest didn't relent, though, for there were six
primordial cedars that shaded an entire acre with
347 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
their vast sweep of branches. the trees held their
protecting shadow right up to the walls of the house
that rose among them, making obsolete the deep
porch that wrapped around the first story.

i don't know what i had expected, but it definitely
wasn't this. the house was timeless, graceful, and
probably a hundred years old. it was painted a soft,
faded white, three stories tall, rectangular and well
proportioned. the windows and doors were either part
of the original structure or a perfect restoration. my
truck was the only car in sight. i could hear the river
close by, hidden in the obscurity of the forest.

"wow."

"you like it?" he smiled.

"it has a certain charm."

he pulled the end of my ponytail and chuckled.

"ready?" he asked, opening my door.

"not even a little bit - let's go." i tried to laugh, but it
seemed to get stuck in my throat. i smoothed my hair
nervously.

"you look lovely." he took my hand easily, without
thinking about it. we walked through the deep shade
up to the porch. i knew he could feel my tension; his
thumb rubbed soothing circles into the back of my
hand. he opened the door for me.

the inside was even more surprising, less predictable,
than the exterior. it was very bright, very open, and
very large. this must have originally been several
348 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
rooms, but the walls had been removed from most of
the first floor to create one wide space. the back,
south-facing wall had been entirely replaced with
glass, and, beyond the shade of the cedars, the lawn
stretched bare to the wide river. a massive curving
staircase dominated the west side of the room. the
walls, the high-beamed ceiling, the wooden floors, and
the thick carpets were all varying shades of white.
waiting to greet us, standing just to the left of the
door, on a raised portion of the floor by a spectacular
grand piano, were edward's parents. i'd seen dr.
cullen before, of course, yet i couldn't help but be
struck again by his youth, his outrageous perfection.
at his side was esme, i assumed, the only one of the
family i'd never seen before. she had the same pale,
beautiful features as the rest of them. something
about her heart-shaped face, her billows of soft,
caramel-colored hair, reminded me of the ingnues of
the silent-movie era. she was small, slender, yet less
angular, more rounded than the others. they were
both dressed casually, in light colors that matched
the inside of the house. they smiled in welcome, but
made no move to approach us. trying not to frighten
me, i guessed.

"carlisle, esme," edward's voice broke the short
silence, "this is bella."

"you're very welcome, bella." carlisle's step was
measured, careful as he approached me. he raised
his hand tentatively, and i stepped forward to shake
hands with him.

"it's nice to see you again, dr. cullen."

349 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"please, call me carlisle."

"carlisle." i grinned at him, my sudden confidence
surprising me. i could feel edward's relief at my side.

esme smiled and stepped forward as well, reaching
for my hand. her cold, stone grasp was just as i
expected.

"it's very nice to know you," she said sincerely.

"thank you. i'm glad to meet you, too." and i was. it
was like meeting a fairy tale - snow white, in the
flesh.

"where are alice and jasper?" edward asked, but no
one answered, as they had just appeared at the top of
the wide staircase.

"hey, edward!" alice called enthusiastically. she ran
down the stairs, a streak of black hair and white skin,
coming to a sudden and graceful stop in front of me.
carlisle and esme shot warning glances at her, but i
liked it. it was natural - for her, anyway.

"hi, bella!" alice said, and she bounced forward to
kiss my cheek. if carlisle and esme had looked
cautious before, they now looked staggered. there
was shock in my eyes, too, but i was also very pleased
that she seemed to approve of me so entirely. i was
startled to feel edward stiffen at my side. i glanced at
his face, but his expression was unreadable.

"you do smell nice, i never noticed before," she
commented, to my extreme embarrassment.

350 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
no one else seemed to know quite what to say, and
then jasper was there -

tall and leonine. a feeling of ease spread through me,
and i was suddenly comfortable despite where i was.
edward stared at jasper, raising one eyebrow, and i
remembered what jasper could do.

"hello, bella," jasper said. he kept his distance, not
offering to shake my hand. but it was impossible to
feel awkward near him.

"hello, jasper." i smiled at him shyly, and then at the
others. "it's nice to meet you all - you have a very
beautiful home," i added conventionally.

"thank you," esme said. "we're so glad that you
came." she spoke with feeling, and i realized that she
thought i was brave.

i also realized that rosalie and emmett were nowhere
to be seen, and i remembered edward's too-innocent
denial when i'd asked him if the others didn't like me.

carlisle's expression distracted me from this train of
thought; he was gazing meaningfully at edward with
an intense expression. out of the corner of my eye, i
saw edward nod once.

i looked away, trying to be polite. my eyes wandered
again to the beautiful instrument on the platform by
the door. i suddenly remembered my childhood
fantasy that, should i ever win a lottery, i would buy a
grand piano for my mother. she wasn't really good -
she only played for herself on our secondhand upright
- but i loved to watch her play. she was happy,

351 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
absorbed - she seemed like a new, mysterious being
to me then, someone outside the "mom" persona i
took for granted. she'd put me through lessons, of
course, but like most kids, i whined until she let me
quit.

esme noticed my preoccupation.

"do you play?" she asked, inclining her head toward
the piano. i shook my head. "not at all. but it's so
beautiful. is it yours?"

"no," she laughed. "edward didn't tell you he was
musical?"

"no." i glared at his suddenly innocent expression
with narrowed eyes. "i should have known, i guess."

esme raised her delicate eyebrows in confusion.

"edward can do everything, right?" i explained.
jasper snickered and esme gave edward a reproving
look.

"i hope you haven't been showing off- it's rude," she
scolded.

"just a bit," he laughed freely. her face softened at
the sound, and they shared a brief look that i didn't
understand, though esme's face seemed almost
smug.

"he's been too modest, actually," i corrected.

"well, play for her," esme encouraged.

"you just said showing off was rude," he objected.

352 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"there are exceptions to every rule," she replied.

"i'd like to hear you play," i volunteered.

"it's settled then." esme pushed him toward the
piano. he pulled me along, sitting me on the bench
beside him.

he gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned
to the keys. and then his fingers flowed swiftly across
the ivory, and the room was filled with a composition
so complex, so luxuriant, it was impossible to believe
only one set of hands played. i felt my chin drop, my
mouth open in astonishment, and heard low chuckles
behind me at my reaction. edward looked at me
casually, the music still surging around us without a
break, and winked. "do you like it?"

"you wrote this?" i gasped, understanding.

he nodded. "it's esme's favorite."

i closed my eyes, shaking my head.

"what's wrong?"

"i'm feeling extremely insignificant."

the music slowed, transforming into something
softer, and to my surprise i detected the melody of his
lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes.

"you inspired this one," he said softly. the music
grew unbearably sweet. i couldn't speak.

"they like you, you know," he said conversationally.
"esme especially." i glanced behind me, but the huge
room was empty now.
353 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"where did they go?"

"very subtly giving us some privacy, i suppose." i
sighed. "they like me. but rosalie and emmett" i
trailed off, not sure how to express my doubts.

he frowned. "don't worry about rosalie," he said, his
eyes wide and persuasive. "she'll come around."

i pursed my lips skeptically. "emmett?"

"well, he thinks i'm a lunatic, it's true, but he doesn't
have a problem with you. he's trying to reason with
rosalie."

"what is it that upsets her?" i wasn't sure if i wanted
to know the answer.

he sighed deeply. "rosalie struggles the most with
with what we are. it's hard for her to have someone
on the outside know the truth. and she's a little
jealous."

"rosalie is jealous of me?" i asked incredulously. i
tried to imagine a universe in which someone as
breathtaking as rosalie would have any possible
reason to feel jealous of someone like me.

"you're human." he shrugged. "she wishes that she
were, too."

"oh," i muttered, still stunned. "even jasper,
though"

"that's really my fault," he said. "i told you he was the
most recent to try our way of life. i warned him to

354 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
keep his distance." i thought about the reason for
that, and shuddered.

"esme and carlisle ?" i continued quickly, to keep
him from noticing.

"are happy to see me happy. actually, esme wouldn't
care if you had a third eye and webbed feet. all this
time she's been worried about me, afraid that there
was something missing from my essential makeup,
that i was too young when carlisle changed me
she's ecstatic. every time i touch you, she just about
chokes with satisfaction."

"alice seems very enthusiastic."

"alice has her own way of looking at things," he said
through tight lips.

"and you're not going to explain that, are you?" a
moment of wordless communication passed between
us. he realized that i knew he was keeping something
from me. i realized that he wasn't going to give
anything away. not now.

"so what was carlisle telling you before?"

his eyebrows pulled together. "you noticed that, did
you?" i shrugged. "of course."

he looked at me thoughtfully for a few seconds before
answering. "he wanted to tell me some news - he
didn't know if it was something i would share with
you."

"will you?"

355 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i have to, because i'm going to be a little
overbearingly protective over the next few days - or
weeks - and i wouldn't want you to think i'm
naturally a tyrant."

"what's wrong?"

"nothing's wrong, exactly. alice just sees some
visitors coming soon. they know we're here, and
they're curious."

"visitors?"

"yes well, they aren't like us, of course - in their
hunting habits, i mean. they probably won't come
into town at all, but i'm certainly not going to let you
out of my sight till they're gone." i shivered.

"finally, a rational response!" he murmured. "i was
beginning to think you had no sense of self-
preservation at all."

i let that one pass, looking away, my eyes wandering
again around the spacious room.

he followed my gaze. "not what you expected, is it?"
he asked, his voice smug.

"no," i admitted.

"no coffins, no piled skulls in the corners; i don't even
think we have cobwebs what a disappointment this
must be for you," he continued slyly. i ignored his
teasing. "it's so light so open." he was more serious
when he answered. "it's the one place we never have
to hide."

356 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the song he was still playing, my song, drifted to an
end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy
key. the last note hovered poignantly in the silence.

"thank you," i murmured. i realized there were tears
in my eyes. i dabbed at them, embarrassed.

he touched the corner of my eye, trapping one i
missed. he lifted his finger, examining the drop of
moisture broodingly. then, so quickly i couldn't be
positive that he really did, he put his finger to his
mouth to taste it.

i looked at him questioningly, and he gazed back for a
long moment before he finally smiled.

"do you want to see the rest of the house?"

"no coffins?" i verified, the sarcasm in my voice not
entirely masking the slight but genuine anxiety i felt.

he laughed, taking my hand, leading me away from
the piano.

"no coffins," he promised.

we walked up the massive staircase, my hand trailing
along the satin-smooth rail. the long hall at the top of
the stairs was paneled with a honey-colored wood, the
same as the floorboards.

"rosalie and emmett's room carlisle's office
alice's room" he gestured as he led me past the
doors.

he would have continued, but i stopped dead at the
end of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament

357 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
hanging on the wall above my head. edward chuckled
at my bewildered expression.

"you can laugh," he said. "it is sort of ironic." i didn't
laugh. my hand raised automatically, one finger
extended as if to touch the large wooden cross, its
dark patina contrasting with the lighter tone of the
wall. i didn't touch it, though i was curious if the
aged wood would feel as silky as it looked.

"it must be very old," i guessed.

he shrugged. "early sixteen-thirties, more or less." i
looked away from the cross to stare at him.

"why do you keep this here?" i wondered.

"nostalgia. it belonged to carlisle's father."

"he collected antiques?" i suggested doubtfully.

"no. he carved this himself. it hung on the wall above
the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached."

i wasn't sure if my face betrayed my shock, but i
returned to gazing at the simple, ancient cross, just in
case. i quickly did the mental math; the cross was
over three hundred and seventy years old. the silence
stretched on as i struggled to wrap my mind around
the concept of so many years.

"are you all right?" he sounded worried.

"how old is carlisle?" i asked quietly, ignoring his
question, still staring up.

"he just celebrated his three hundred and sixty-
second birthday," edward said. i looked back at him,
358 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
a million questions in my eyes. he watched me
carefully as he spoke.

"carlisle was born in london, in the sixteen-forties,
he believes. time wasn't marked as accurately then,
for the common people anyway. it was just before
cromwell's rule, though."

i kept my face composed, aware of his scrutiny as i
listened. it was easier if i didn't try to believe.

"he was the only son of an anglican pastor. his
mother died giving birth to him. his father was an
intolerant man. as the protestants came into power,
he was enthusiastic in his persecution of roman
catholics and other religions. he also believed very
strongly in the reality of evil. he led hunts for witches,
werewolves and vampires." i grew very still at the
word. i'm sure he noticed, but he went on without
pausing.

"they burned a lot of innocent people - of course the
real creatures that he sought were not so easy to
catch.

"when the pastor grew old, he placed his obedient son
in charge of the raids. at first carlisle was a
disappointment; he was not quick to accuse, to see
demons where they did not exist. but he was
persistent, and more clever than his father. he
actually discovered a coven of true vampires that lived
hidden in the sewers of the city, only coming out by
night to hunt. in those days, when monsters were not
just myths and legends, that was the way many lived.

359 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"the people gathered their pitchforks and torches, of
course" - his brief laugh was darker now - "and
waited where carlisle had seen the monsters exit into
the street. eventually one emerged."

his voice was very quiet; i strained to catch the
words.

"he must have been ancient, and weak with hunger.
carlisle heard him call out in latin to the others
when he caught the scent of the mob. he ran through
the streets, and carlisle - he was twenty-three and
very fast -

was in the lead of the pursuit. the creature could
have easily outrun them, but carlisle thinks he was
too hungry, so he turned and attacked. he fell on
carlisle first, but the others were close behind, and
he turned to defend himself. he killed two men, and
made off with a third, leaving carlisle bleeding in the
street."

he paused. i could sense he was editing something,
keeping something from me.

"carlisle knew what his father would do. the bodies
would be burned -

anything infected by the monster must be destroyed.
carlisle acted instinctively to save his own life. he
crawled away from the alley while the mob followed
the fiend and his victim. he hid in a cellar, buried
himself in rotting potatoes for three days. it's a
miracle he was able to keep silent, to stay
undiscovered.

360 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"it was over then, and he realized what he had
become." i'm not sure what my face was revealing,
but he suddenly broke off.

"how are you feeling?" he asked.

"i'm fine," i assured him. and, though i bit my lip in
hesitation, he must have seen the curiosity burning
in my eyes.

he smiled. "i expect you have a few more questions
for me."

"a few."

his smile widened over his brilliant teeth. he started
back down the hall, pulling me along by the hand.
"come on, then," he encouraged. "i'll show you."

361 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 carlisle

he led me back to the room that he'd pointed out as
carlisle's office. he paused outside the door for an
instant.

"come in," carlisle's voice invited.

edward opened the door to a high-ceilinged room with
tall, west-facing windows. the walls were paneled
again, in a darker wood - where they were visible.
most of the wall space was taken up by towering
bookshelves that reached high above my head and
held more books than i'd ever seen outside a library.

carlisle sat behind a huge mahogany desk in a
leather chair. he was just placing a bookmark in the
pages of the thick volume he held. the room was how
i'd always imagined a college dean's would look -
only carlisle looked too young to fit the part.

"what can i do for you?" he asked us pleasantly,
rising from his seat.

"i wanted to show bella some of our history," edward
said. "well, your history, actually."

"we didn't mean to disturb you," i apologized.

"not at all. where are you going to start?"

"the waggoner," edward replied, placing one hand
lightly on my shoulder and spinning me around to
look back toward the door we'd just come through.

362 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
every time he touched me, in even the most casual
way, my heart had an audible reaction. it was more
embarrassing with carlisle there. the wall we faced
now was different from the others. instead of
bookshelves, this wall was crowded with framed
pictures of all sizes, some in vibrant colors, others
dull monochromes. i searched for some logic, some
binding motif the collection had in common, but i
found nothing in my hasty examination.

edward pulled me toward the far left side, standing
me in front of a small square oil painting in a plain
wooden frame. this one did not stand out among the
bigger and brighter pieces; painted in varying tones of
sepia, it depicted a miniature city full of steeply
slanted roofs, with thin spires atop a few scattered
towers. a wide river filled the foreground, crossed by a
bridge covered with structures that looked like tiny
cathedrals.

"london in the sixteen-fifties," edward said.

"the london of my youth," carlisle added, from a few
feet behind us. i flinched; i hadn't heard him
approach. edward squeezed my hand.

"will you tell the story?" edward asked. i twisted a
little to see carlisle's reaction.

he met my glance and smiled. "i would," he replied.
"but i'm actually running a bit late. the hospital
called this morning - dr. snow is taking a sick day.
besides, you know the stories as well as i do," he
added, grinning at edward now.

363 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it was a strange combination to absorb - the
everyday concerns of the town doctor stuck in the
middle of a discussion of his early days in
seventeenth-century london.

it was also unsettling to know that he spoke aloud
only for my benefit. after another warm smile for me,
carlisle left the room.

i stared at the little picture of carlisle's hometown for
a long moment.

"what happened then?" i finally asked, staring up at
edward, who was watching me. "when he realized
what had happened to him?" he glanced back to the
paintings, and i looked to see which image caught his
interest now. it was a larger landscape in dull fall
colors - an empty, shadowed meadow in a forest,
with a craggy peak in the distance.

"when he knew what he had become," edward said
quietly, "he rebelled against it. he tried to destroy
himself. but that's not easily done."

"how?" i didn't mean to say it aloud, but the word
broke through my shock.

"he jumped from great heights," edward told me, his
voice impassive. "he tried to drown himself in the
ocean but he was young to the new life, and very
strong. it is amazing that he was able to resist
feeding while he was still so new. the instinct is
more powerful then, it takes over everything. but he
was so repelled by himself that he had the strength to
try to kill himself with starvation."

364 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"is that possible?" my voice was faint.

"no, there are very few ways we can be killed." i
opened my mouth to ask, but he spoke before i could.

"so he grew very hungry, and eventually weak. he
strayed as far as he could from the human populace,
recognizing that his willpower was weakening, too.
for months he wandered by night, seeking the
loneliest places, loathing himself.

"one night, a herd of deer passed his hiding place. he
was so wild with thirst that he attacked without a
thought. his strength returned and he realized there
was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared.
had he not eaten venison in his former life? over the
next months his new philosophy was born. he could
exist without being a demon. he found himself again.

"he began to make better use of his time. he'd always
been intelligent, eager to learn. now he had unlimited
time before him. he studied by night, planned by day.
he swam to france and -"

"he swam to france?"

"people swim the channel all the time, bella," he
reminded me patiently.

"that's true, i guess. it just sounded funny in that
context. go on."

"swimming is easy for us -"

"everything is easy for you," i griped.

he waited, his expression amused.

365 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i won't interrupt again, i promise."

he chuckled darkly, and finished his sentence.
"because, technically, we don't need to breathe."

"you -"

"no, no, you promised." he laughed, putting his cold
finger lightly to my lips. "do you want to hear the
story or not?"

"you can't spring something like that on me, and then
expect me not to say anything," i mumbled against
his finger.

he lifted his hand, moving it to rest against my neck.
the speed of my heart reacted to that, but i persisted.

"you don't have to breathe?" i demanded.

"no, it's not necessary. just a habit." he shrugged.

"how long can you go without breathing?"

"indefinitely, i suppose; i don't know. it gets a bit
uncomfortable -

being without a sense of smell."

"a bit uncomfortable," i echoed.

i wasn't paying attention to my own expression, but
something in it made him grow somber. his hand
dropped to his side and he stood very still, his eyes
intent on my face. the silence lengthened. his
features were immobile as stone.

366 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what is it?" i whispered, touching his frozen face. his
face softened under my hand, and he sighed. "i keep
waiting for it to happen."

"for what to happen?"

"i know that at some point, something i tell you or
something you see is going to be too much. and then
you'll run away from me, screaming as you go." he
smiled half a smile, but his eyes were serious. "i won't
stop you. i want this to happen, because i want you
to be safe. and yet, i want to be with you. the two
desires are impossible to reconcile" he trailed off,
staring at my face. waiting.

"i'm not running anywhere," i promised.

"we'll see," he said, smiling again.

i frowned at him. "so, go on - carlisle was swimming
to france." he paused, getting back into his story.
reflexively, his eyes flickered to another picture - the
most colorful of them all, the most ornately framed,
and the largest; it was twice as wide as the door it
hung next to. the canvas overflowed with bright
figures in swirling robes, writhing around long pillars
and off marbled balconies. i couldn't tell if it
represented greek mythology, or if the characters
floating in the clouds above were meant to be biblical.

"carlisle swam to france, and continued on through
europe, to the universities there. by night he studied
music, science, medicine - and found his calling, his
penance, in that, in saving human lives." his
expression became awed, almost reverent. "i can't
adequately describe the struggle; it took carlisle two
367 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control.
now he is all but immune to the scent of human
blood, and he is able to do the work he loves without
agony. he finds a great deal of peace there, at the
hospital" edward stared off into space for a long
moment. suddenly he seemed to recall his purpose.
he tapped his finger against the huge painting in
front of us.

"he was studying in italy when he discovered the
others there. they were much more civilized and
educated than the wraiths of the london sewers." he
touched a comparatively sedate quartet of figures
painted on the highest balcony, looking down calmly
on the mayhem below them. i examined the grouping
carefully and realized, with a startled laugh, that i
recognized the golden-haired man.

"solimena was greatly inspired by carlisle's friends.
he often painted them as gods," edward chuckled.
"aro, marcus, caius," he said, indicating the other
three, two black-haired, one snowy-white. "nighttime
patrons of the arts."

"what happened to them?" i wondered aloud, my
fingertip hovering a centimeter from the figures on the
canvas.

"they're still there." he shrugged. "as they have been
for who knows how many millennia. carlisle stayed
with them only for a short time, just a few decades.
he greatly admired their civility, their refinement, but
they persisted in trying to cure his aversion to 'his
natural food source,' as they called it. they tried to
persuade him, and he tried to persuade them, to no

368 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
avail. at that point, carlisle decided to try the new
world. he dreamed of finding others like himself. he
was very lonely, you see.

"he didn't find anyone for a long time. but, as
monsters became the stuff of fairy tales, he found he
could interact with unsuspecting humans as if he
were one of them. he began practicing medicine. but
the companionship he craved evaded him; he couldn't
risk familiarity.

"when the influenza epidemic hit, he was working
nights in a hospital in chicago. he'd been turning
over an idea in his mind for several years, and he had
almost decided to act - since he couldn't find a
companion, he would create one. he wasn't absolutely
sure how his own transformation had occurred, so he
was hesitant. and he was loath to steal anyone's life
the way his had been stolen. it was in that frame of
mind that he found me. there was no hope for me; i
was left in a ward with the dying. he had nursed my
parents, and knew i was alone. he decided to try"
his voice, nearly a whisper now, trailed off. he stared
unseeingly through the west windows. i wondered
which images filled his mind now, carlisle's memories
or his own. i waited quietly.

when he turned back to me, a gentle angel's smile lit
his expression.

"and so we've come full circle," he concluded.

"have you always stayed with carlisle, then?" i
wondered.

369 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"almost always." he put his hand lightly on my waist
and pulled me with him as he walked through the
door. i stared back at the wall of pictures, wondering
if i would ever get to hear the other stories.

edward didn't say any more as we walked down the
hall, so i asked,

"almost?"

he sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "well, i had a
typical bout of rebellious adolescence - about ten
years after i was born created, whatever you want
to call it. i wasn't sold on his life of abstinence, and i
resented him for curbing my appetite. so i went off on
my own for a time."

"really?" i was intrigued, rather than frightened, as i
perhaps should have been.

he could tell. i vaguely realized that we were headed
up the next flight of stairs, but i wasn't paying much
attention to my surroundings.

"that doesn't repulse you?"

"no."

"why not?"

"i guess it sounds reasonable."

he barked a laugh, more loudly than before. we were
at the top of the stairs now, in another paneled
hallway.

"from the time of my new birth," he murmured, "i
had the advantage of knowing what everyone around
370 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
me was thinking, both human and non-human alike.
that's why it took me ten years to defy carlisle - i
could read his perfect sincerity, understand exactly
why he lived the way he did.

"it took me only a few years to return to carlisle and
recommit to his vision. i thought i would be exempt
from the depression that accompanies a
conscience. because i knew the thoughts of my prey,
i could pass over the innocent and pursue only the
evil. if i followed a murderer down a dark alley where
he stalked a young girl - if i saved her, then surely i
wasn't so terrible."

i shivered, imagining only too clearly what he
described - the alley at night, the frightened girl, the
dark man behind her. and edward, edward as he
hunted, terrible and glorious as a young god,
unstoppable. would she have been grateful, that girl,
or more frightened than before?

"but as time went on, i began to see the monster in
my eyes. i couldn't escape the debt of so much
human life taken, no matter how justified. and i went
back to carlisle and esme. they welcomed me back
like the prodigal. it was more than i deserved."

we'd come to a stop in front of the last door in the
hall.

"my room," he informed me, opening it and pulling me
through. his room faced south, with a wall-sized
window like the great room below. the whole back
side of the house must be glass. his view looked down
on the winding sol duc river, across the untouched
forest to the olympic mountain range. the mountains
371 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
were much closer than i would have believed. the
western wall was completely covered with shelf after
shelf of cds. his room was better stocked than a
music store. in the corner was a sophisticated-looking
sound system, the kind i was afraid to touch because
i'd be sure to break something. there was no bed,
only a wide and inviting black leather sofa. the floor
was covered with a thick golden carpet, and the walls
were hung with heavy fabric in a slightly darker
shade.

"good acoustics?" i guessed.

he chuckled and nodded.

he picked up a remote and turned the stereo on. it
was quiet, but the soft jazz number sounded like the
band was in the room with us. i went to look at his
mind-boggling music collection.

"how do you have these organized?" i asked, unable
to find any rhyme or reason to the titles.

he wasn't paying attention.

"ummm, by year, and then by personal preference
within that frame," he said absently.

i turned, and he was looking at me with a peculiar
expression in his eyes.

"what?"

"i was prepared to feel relieved. having you know
about everything, not needing to keep secrets from
you. but i didn't expect to feel more than that. i like

372 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
it. it makes me happy." he shrugged, smiling
slightly.

"i'm glad," i said, smiling back. i'd worried that he
might regret telling me these things. it was good to
know that wasn't the case. but then, as his eyes
dissected my expression, his smile faded and his
forehead creased.

"you're still waiting for the running and the
screaming, aren't you?" i guessed.

a faint smile touched his lips, and he nodded.

"i hate to burst your bubble, but you're really not as
scary as you think you are. i don't find you scary at
all, actually," i lied casually. he stopped, raising his
eyebrows in blatant disbelief. then he flashed a wide,
wicked smile.

"you really shouldn't have said that," he chuckled. he
growled, a low sound in the back of his throat; his
lips curled back over his perfect teeth. his body
shifted suddenly, half-crouched, tensed like a lion
about to pounce.

i backed away from him, glaring.

"you wouldn't."

i didn't see him leap at me - it was much too fast. i
only found myself suddenly airborne, and then we
crashed onto the sofa, knocking it into the wall. all
the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection
around me - i was barely jostled. but i still was
gasping as i tried to right myself.

373 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he wasn't having that. he curled me into a ball
against his chest, holding me more securely than iron
chains. i glared at him in alarm, but he seemed well
in control, his jaw relaxed as he grinned, his eyes
bright only with humor.

"you were saying?" he growled playfully.

"that you are a very, very terrifying monster," i said,
my sarcasm marred a bit by my breathless voice.

"much better," he approved.

"um." i struggled. "can i get up now?" he just
laughed.

"can we come in?" a soft voice sounded from the hall.
i struggled to free myself, but edward merely
readjusted me so that i was somewhat more
conventionally seated on his lap. i could see it was
alice, then, and jasper behind her in the doorway.
my cheeks burned, but edward seemed at ease.

"go ahead." edward was still chuckling quietly. alice
seemed to find nothing unusual in our embrace; she
walked - almost danced, her movements were so
graceful - to the center of the room, where she folded
herself sinuously onto the floor. jasper, however,
paused at the door, his expression a trifle shocked.
he stared at edward's face, and i wondered if he was
tasting the atmosphere with his unusual sensitivity.

"it sounded like you were having bella for lunch, and
we came to see if you would share," alice announced.

i stiffened for an instant, until i realized edward was
grinning -
374 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
whether at her comment or my response, i couldn't
tell.

"sorry, i don't believe i have enough to spare," he
replied, his arms holding me recklessly close.

"actually," jasper said, smiling despite himself as he
walked into the room, "alice says there's going to be a
real storm tonight, and emmett wants to play ball.
are you game?"

the words were all common enough, but the context
confused me. i gathered that alice was a bit more
reliable than the weatherman, though. edward's eyes
lit up, but he hesitated.

"of course you should bring bella," alice chirped. i
thought i saw jasper throw a quick glance at her.

"do you want to go?" edward asked me, excited, his
expression vivid.

"sure." i couldn't disappoint such a face. "um, where
are we going?"

"we have to wait for thunder to play ball - you'll see
why," he promised.

"will i need an umbrella?"

they all three laughed aloud.

"will she?" jasper asked alice.

"no." she was positive. "the storm will hit over town.
it should be dry enough in the clearing."

375 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"good, then." the enthusiasm in jasper's voice was
catching, naturally. i found myself eager, rather than
scared stiff.

"let's go see if carlisle will come." alice bounded up
and to the door in a fashion that would break any
ballerina's heart.

"like you don't know," jasper teased, and they were
swiftly on their way. jasper managed to
inconspicuously close the door behind them.

"what will we be playing?" i demanded.

"you will be watching," edward clarified. "we will be
playing baseball." i rolled my eyes. "vampires like
baseball?"

"it's the american pastime," he said with mock
solemnity.

376 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 the game

it was just beginning to drizzle when edward turned
onto my street. up until that moment, i'd had no
doubt that he'd be staying with me while i spent a few
interim hours in the real world.

and then i saw the black car, a weathered ford,
parked in charlie's driveway - and heard edward
mutter something unintelligible in a low, harsh voice.

leaning away from the rain under the shallow front
porch, jacob black stood behind his father's
wheelchair. billy's face was impassive as stone as
edward parked my truck against the curb. jacob
stared down, his expression mortified.

edward's low voice was furious. "this is crossing the
line."

"he came to warn charlie?" i guessed, more horrified
than angry. edward just nodded, answering billy's
gaze through the rain with narrowed eyes.

i felt weak with relief that charlie wasn't home yet.

"let me deal with this," i suggested. edward's black
glare made me anxious.

to my surprise, he agreed. "that's probably best. be
careful, though. the child has no idea."

i bridled a little at the word child. "jacob is not that
much younger than i am," i reminded him.

377 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he looked at me then, his anger abruptly fading. "oh,
i know," he assured me with a grin.

i sighed and put my hand on the door handle.

"get them inside," he instructed, "so i can leave. i'll be
back around dusk."

"do you want my truck?" i offered, meanwhile
wondering how i would explain its absence to charlie.

he rolled his eyes. "i could walk home faster than this
truck moves."

"you don't have to leave," i said wistfully.

he smiled at my glum expression. "actually, i do.
after you get rid of them" - he threw a dark glance in
the blacks' direction - "you still have to prepare
charlie to meet your new boyfriend." he grinned
widely, showing all of his teeth.

i groaned. "thanks a lot."

he smiled the crooked smile that i loved. "i'll be back
soon," he promised. his eyes flickered back to the
porch, and then he leaned in to swiftly kiss me just
under the edge of my jaw. my heart lurched
frantically, and i, too, glanced toward the porch.
billy's face was no longer impassive, and his hands
clutched at the armrests of his chair.

"soon," i stressed as i opened the door and stepped
out into the rain. i could feel his eyes on my back as i
half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch.

378 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"hey, billy. hi, jacob." i greeted them as cheerfully as
i could manage.

"charlie's gone for the day - i hope you haven't been
waiting long."

"not long," billy said in a subdued tone. his black
eyes were piercing.

"i just wanted to bring this up." he indicated a brown
paper sack resting in his lap.

"thanks," i said, though i had no idea what it could
be. "why don't you come in for a minute and dry off?"

i pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as i
unlocked the door, and waved them in ahead of me.

"here, let me take that," i offered, turning to shut the
door. i allowed myself one last glance at edward. he
was waiting, perfectly still, his eyes solemn.

"you'll want to put it in the fridge," billy noted as he
handed me the package. "it's some of harry
clearwater's homemade fish fry - charlie's favorite.
the fridge keeps it drier." he shrugged.

"thanks," i repeated, but with feeling this time. "i was
running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound to
bring home more tonight."

"fishing again?" billy asked with a subtle gleam in his
eye. "down at the usual spot? maybe i'll run by and
see him."

"no," i quickly lied, my face going hard. "he was
headed someplace new

379 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
but i have no idea where."

he took in my changed expression, and it made him
thoughtful.

"jake," he said, still appraising me. "why don't you go
get that new picture of rebecca out of the car? i'll
leave that for charlie, too."

"where is it?" jacob asked, his voice morose. i
glanced at him, but he was staring at the floor, his
eyebrows pulling together.

"i think i saw it in the trunk," billy said. "you may
have to dig for it." jacob slouched back out into the
rain.

billy and i faced each other in silence. after a few
seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so i
turned and headed to the kitchen. i could hear his
wet wheels squeak against the linoleum as he
followed. i shoved the bag onto the crowded top shelf
of the fridge, and spun around to confront him. his
deeply lined face was unreadable.

"charlie won't be back for a long time." my voice was
almost rude. he nodded in agreement, but said
nothing.

"thanks again for the fish fry," i hinted.

he continued nodding. i sighed and folded my arms
across my chest. he seemed to sense that i had given
up on small talk. "bella," he said, and then he
hesitated.

i waited.
380 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bella," he said again, "charlie is one of my best
friends."

"yes."

he spoke each word carefully in his rumbling voice. "i
noticed you've been spending time with one of the
cullens."

"yes," i repeated curtly.

his eyes narrowed. "maybe it's none of my business,
but i don't think that is such a good idea."

"you're right," i agreed. "it is none of your business."
he raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "you
probably don't know this, but the cullen family has
an unpleasant reputation on the reservation."

"actually, i did know that," i informed him in a hard
voice. this surprised him. "but that reputation
couldn't be deserved, could it?

because the cullens never set foot on the reservation,
do they?" i could see that my less than subtle
reminder of the agreement that both bound and
protected his tribe pulled him up short.

"that's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "you
seem well informed about the cullens. more
informed than i expected."

i stared him down. "maybe even better informed than
you are." he pursed his thick lips as he considered
that. "maybe." he allowed, but his eyes were shrewd.
"is charlie as well informed?" he had found the weak
chink in my armor.
381 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"charlie likes the cullens a lot," i hedged. he clearly
understood my evasion. his expression was unhappy,
but unsurprised.

"it's not my business," he said. "but it may be
charlie's."

"though it would be my business, again, whether or
not i think that it's charlie's business, right?"

i wondered if he even understood my confused
question as i struggled not to say anything
compromising. but he seemed to. he thought about it
while the rain picked up against the roof, the only
sound breaking the silence.

"yes," he finally surrendered. "i guess that's your
business, too." i sighed with relief. "thanks, billy."

"just think about what you're doing, bella," he urged.

"okay," i agreed quickly.

he frowned. "what i meant to say was, don't do what
you're doing." i looked into his eyes, filled with
nothing but concern for me, and there was nothing i
could say.

just then the front door banged loudly, and i jumped
at the sound.

"there's no picture anywhere in that car." jacob's
complaining voice reached us before he did. the
shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his
hair dripping, when he rounded the corner.

382 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"hmm," billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning
his chair around to face his son. "i guess i left it at
home."

jacob rolled his eyes dramatically. "great."

"well, bella, tell charlie" - billy paused before
continuing - "that we stopped by, i mean."

"i will," i muttered.

jacob was surprised. "are we leaving already?"

"charlie's gonna be out late," billy explained as he
rolled himself past jacob.

"oh." jacob looked disappointed. "well, i guess i'll see
you later, then, bella."

"sure," i agreed.

"take care," billy warned me. i didn't answer.

jacob helped his father out the door. i waved briefly,
glancing swiftly toward my now-empty truck, and
then shut the door before they were gone. i stood in
the hallway for a minute, listening to the sound of
their car as it backed out and drove away. i stayed
where i was, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to
subside. when the tension eventually faded a bit, i
headed upstairs to change out of my dressy clothes. i
tried on a couple of different tops, not sure what to
expect tonight. as i concentrated on what was
coming, what had just passed became insignificant.
now that i was removed from jasper's and edward's
influence, i began to make up for not being terrified
before. i gave up quickly on choosing an outfit -

383 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans - knowing
i would be in my raincoat all night anyway. the
phone rang and i sprinted downstairs to get it. there
was only one voice i wanted to hear; anything else
would be a disappointment. but i knew that if he
wanted to talk to me, he'd probably just materialize in
my room.

"hello?" i asked, breathless.

"bella? it's me," jessica said.

"oh, hey, jess." i scrambled for a moment to come
back down to reality. it felt like months rather than
days since i'd spoken to jess. "how was the dance?"

"it was so much fun!" jessica gushed. needing no
more invitation than that, she launched into a
minute-by-minute account of the previous night. i
mmm'd and ahh'd at the right places, but it wasn't
easy to concentrate. jessica, mike, the dance, the
school - they all seemed strangely irrelevant at the
moment. my eyes kept flashing to the window, trying
to judge the degree of light behind the heavy clouds.

"did you hear what i said, bella?" jess asked,
irritated.

"i'm sorry, what?"

"i said, mike kissed me! can you believe it?"

"that's wonderful, jess," i said.

"so what did you do yesterday?" jessica challenged,
still sounding bothered by my lack of attention. or

384 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
maybe she was upset because i hadn't asked for
details.

"nothing, really. i just hung around outside to enjoy
the sun." i heard charlie's car in the garage.

"did you ever hear anything more from edward
cullen?" the front door slammed and i could hear
charlie banging around under the stairs, putting his
tackle away.

"um." i hesitated, not sure what my story was
anymore.

"hi there, kiddo!" charlie called as he walked into the
kitchen. i waved at him.

jess heard his voice. "oh, your dad's there. never
mind - we'll talk tomorrow. see you in trig."

"see ya, jess." i hung up the phone.

"hey, dad," i said. he was scrubbing his hands in the
sink. "where's the fish?"

"i put it out in the freezer."

"i'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze - billy
dropped off some of harry clearwater's fish fry this
afternoon." i worked to sound enthusiastic.

"he did?" charlie's eyes lit up. "that's my favorite."
charlie cleaned up while i got dinner ready. it didn't
take long till we were sitting at the table, eating in
silence. charlie was enjoying his food. i was
wondering desperately how to fulfill my assignment,
struggling to think of a way to broach the subject.

385 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what did you do with yourself today?" he asked,
snapping me out of my reverie.

"well, this afternoon i just hung out around the
house" only the very recent part of this afternoon,
actually. i tried to keep my voice upbeat, but my
stomach was hollow. "and this morning i was over at
the cullens'." charlie dropped his fork.

"dr. cullen's place?" he asked in astonishment. i
pretended not to notice his reaction. "yeah."

"what were you doing there?" he hadn't picked his
fork back up.

"well, i sort of have a date with edward cullen
tonight, and he wanted to introduce me to his
parents dad?"

it appeared that charlie was having an aneurysm.

"dad, are you all right?"

"you are going out with edward cullen?" he
thundered. uh-oh. "i thought you liked the cullens."

"he's too old for you," he ranted.

"we're both juniors," i corrected, though he was more
right than he dreamed.

"wait" he paused. "which one is edwin?"

"edward is the youngest, the one with the reddish
brown hair." the beautiful one, the godlike one

386 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"oh, well, that's" - he struggled - "better, i guess. i
don't like the look of that big one. i'm sure he's a nice
boy and all, but he looks too

mature for you. is this edwin your boyfriend?"

"it's edward, dad."

"is he?"

"sort of, i guess."

"you said last night that you weren't interested in any
of the boys in town." but he picked up his fork again,
so i could see the worst was over.

"well, edward doesn't live in town, dad."

he gave me a disparaging look as he chewed.

"and, anyways," i continued, "it's kind of at an early
stage, you know. don't embarrass me with all the
boyfriend talk, okay?"

"when is he coming over?"

"he'll be here in a few minutes."

"where is he taking you?"

i groaned loudly. "i hope you're getting the spanish
inquisition out of your system now. we're going to
play baseball with his family." his face puckered, and
then he finally chuckled. "you're playing baseball?"

"well, i'll probably watch most of the time."

387 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you must really like this guy," he observed
suspiciously. i sighed and rolled my eyes for his
benefit.

i heard the roar of an engine pull up in front of the
house. i jumped up and started cleaning my dishes.

"leave the dishes, i can do them tonight. you baby
me too much." the doorbell rang, and charlie stalked
off to answer it. i was half a step behind him.

i hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside.
edward stood in the halo of the porch light, looking
like a male model in an advertisement for raincoats.

"come on in, edward."

i breathed a sigh of relief when charlie got his name
right.

"thanks, chief swan," edward said in a respectful
voice.

"go ahead and call me charlie. here, i'll take your
jacket."

"thanks, sir."

"have a seat there, edward."

i grimaced.

edward sat down fluidly in the only chair, forcing me
to sit next to chief swan on the sofa. i quickly shot
him a dirty look. he winked behind charlie's back.

"so i hear you're getting my girl to watch baseball."
only in washington would the fact that it was raining

388 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
buckets have no bearing at all on the playing of
outdoor sports.

"yes, sir, that's the plan." he didn't look surprised
that i'd told my father the truth. he might have been
listening, though.

"well, more power to you, i guess."

charlie laughed, and edward joined in.

"okay." i stood up. "enough humor at my expense.
let's go." i walked back to the hall and pulled on my
jacket. they followed.

"not too late, bell."

"don't worry, charlie, i'll have her home early,"
edward promised.

"you take care of my girl, all right?"

i groaned, but they ignored me.

"she'll be safe with me, i promise, sir."

charlie couldn't doubt edward's sincerity, it rang in
every word. i stalked out. they both laughed, and
edward followed me. i stopped dead on the porch.
there, behind my truck, was a monster jeep. its tires
were higher than my waist. there were metal guards
over the headlights and tail-lights, and four large
spotlights attached to the crash bar. the hardtop was
shiny red.

charlie let out a low whistle.

"wear your seat belts," he choked out.

389 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
edward followed me around to my side and opened
the door. i gauged the distance to the seat and
prepared to jump for it. he sighed, and then lifted me
in with one hand. i hoped charlie didn't notice. as he
went around to the driver's side, at a normal, human
pace, i tried to put on my seat belt. but there were too
many buckles.

"what's all this?" i asked when he opened the door.

"it's an off-roading harness."

"uh-oh."

i tried to find the right places for all the buckles to fit,
but it wasn't going too quickly. he sighed again and
reached over to help me. i was glad that the rain was
too heavy to see charlie clearly on the porch. that
meant he couldn't see how edward's hands lingered
at my neck, brushed along my collarbones. i gave up
trying to help him and focused on not
hyperventilating.

edward turned the key and the engine roared to life.
we pulled away from the house.

"this is a um big jeep you have."

"it's emmett's. i didn't think you'd want to run the
whole way."

"where do you keep this thing?"

"we remodeled one of the outbuildings into a garage."

"aren't you going to put on your seat belt?"

he threw me a disbelieving look.
390 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
then something sunk in.

"run the whole way? as in, we're still going to run
part of the way?" my voice edged up a few octaves.

he grinned tightly. "you're not going to run."

"i'm going to be sick."

"keep your eyes closed, you'll be fine."

i bit my lip, fighting the panic.

he leaned over to kiss the top of my head, and then
groaned. i looked at him, puzzled.

"you smell so good in the rain," he explained.

"in a good way, or in a bad way?" i asked cautiously.
he sighed. "both, always both."

i don't know how he found his way in the gloom and
downpour, but he somehow found a side road that
was less of a road and more of a mountain path. for a
long while conversation was impossible, because i
was bouncing up and down on the seat like a
jackhammer. he seemed to enjoy the ride, though,
smiling hugely the whole way.

and then we came to the end of the road; the trees
formed green walls on three sides of the jeep. the
rain was a mere drizzle, slowing every second, the sky
brighter through the clouds.

"sorry, bella, we have to go on foot from here."

"you know what? i'll just wait here."

391 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what happened to all your courage? you were
extraordinary this morning."

"i haven't forgotten the last time yet." could it have
been only yesterday?

he was around to my side of the car in a blur. he
started unbuckling me.

"i'll get those, you go on ahead," i protested.

"hmmm" he mused as he quickly finished. "it seems
i'm going to have to tamper with your memory."

before i could react, he pulled me from the jeep and
set my feet on the ground. it was barely misting now;
alice was going to be right.

"tamper with my memory?" i asked nervously.

"something like that." he was watching me intently,
carefully, but there was humor deep in his eyes. he
placed his hands against the jeep on either side of
my head and leaned forward, forcing me to press back
against the door. he leaned in even closer, his face
inches from mine. i had no room to escape.

"now," he breathed, and just his smell disturbed my
thought processes,

"what exactly are you worrying about?"

"well, um, hitting a tree -" i gulped "- and dying.
and then getting sick."

he fought back a smile. then he bent his head down
and touched his cold lips softly to the hollow at the
base of my throat.
392 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"are you still worried now?" he murmured against my
skin.

"yes." i struggled to concentrate. "about hitting trees
and getting sick." his nose drew a line up the skin of
my throat to the point of my chin. his cold breath
tickled my skin.

"and now?" his lips whispered against my jaw.

"trees," i gasped. "motion sickness." he lifted his face
to kiss my eyelids. "bella, you don't really think i
would hit a tree, do you?"

"no, but i might." there was no confidence in my
voice. he smelled an easy victory.

he kissed slowly down my cheek, stopping just at the
corner of my mouth.

"would i let a tree hurt you?" his lips barely brushed
against my trembling lower lip.

"no," i breathed. i knew there was a second part to
my brilliant defense, but i couldn't quite call it back.

"you see," he said, his lips moving against mine.
"there's nothing to be afraid of, is there?"

"no," i sighed, giving up.

then he took my face in his hands almost roughly,
and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding lips moving
against mine.

there really was no excuse for my behavior.
obviously i knew better by now. and yet i couldn't
seem to stop from reacting exactly as i had the first
393 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
time. instead of keeping safely motionless, my arms
reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and i
was suddenly welded to his stone figure. i sighed, and
my lips parted.

he staggered back, breaking my grip effortlessly.

"damn it, bella!" he broke off, gasping. "you'll be the
death of me, i swear you will."

i leaned over, bracing my hands against my knees for
support.

"you're indestructible," i mumbled, trying to catch my
breath.

"i might have believed that before i met you. now let's
get out of here before i do something really stupid," he
growled.

he threw me across his back as he had before, and i
could see the extra effort it took for him to be as
gentle as he was. i locked my legs around his waist
and secured my arms in a choke hold around his
neck.

"don't forget to close your eyes," he warned severely. i
quickly tucked my face into his shoulder blade, under
my own arm, and squeezed my eyes shut.

and i could hardly tell we were moving. i could feel
him gliding along beneath me, but he could have been
strolling down the sidewalk, the movement was so
smooth. i was tempted to peek, just to see if he was
really flying through the forest like before, but i
resisted. it wasn't worth that awful dizziness. i

394 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
contented myself with listening to his breath come
and go evenly.

i wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached
back and touched my hair.

"it's over, bella."

i dared to open my eyes, and, sure enough, we were
at a standstill. i stiffly unlocked my stranglehold on
his body and slipped to the ground, landing on my
backside.

"oh!" i huffed as i hit the wet ground.

he stared at me incredulously, evidently not sure
whether he was still too mad to find me funny. but
my bewildered expression pushed him over the edge,
and he broke into a roar of laughter.

i picked myself up, ignoring him as i brushed the
mud and bracken off the back of my jacket. that only
made him laugh harder. annoyed, i began to stride off
into the forest.

i felt his arm around my waist.

"where are you going, bella?"

"to watch a baseball game. you don't seem to be
interested in playing anymore, but i'm sure the others
will have fun without you."

"you're going the wrong way."

i turned around without looking at him, and stalked
off in the opposite direction. he caught me again.

395 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"don't be mad, i couldn't help myself. you should
have seen your face." he chuckled before he could
stop himself.

"oh, you're the only one who's allowed to get mad?" i
asked, raising my eyebrows.

"i wasn't mad at you."

"'bella, you'll be the death of me'?" i quoted sourly.

"that was simply a statement of fact."

i tried to turn away from him again, but he held me
fast.

"you were mad," i insisted.

"yes."

"but you just said -"

"that i wasn't mad at you. can't you see that, bella?"
he was suddenly intense, all trace of teasing gone.
"don't you understand?"

"see what?" i demanded, confused by his sudden
mood swing as much as his words.

"i'm never angry with you - how could i be? brave,
trusting warm as you are."

"then why?" i whispered, remembering the black
moods that pulled him away from me, that i'd always
interpreted as well-justified frustration -

frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly
human reactions

396 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he put his hands carefully on both sides of my face. "i
infuriate myself," he said gently. "the way i can't
seem to keep from putting you in danger. my very
existence puts you at risk. sometimes i truly hate
myself. i should be stronger, i should be able to -" i
placed my hand over his mouth. "don't."

he took my hand, moving it from his lips, but holding
it to his face.

"i love you," he said. "it's a poor excuse for what i'm
doing, but it's still true."

it was the first time he'd said he loved me - in so
many words. he might not realize it, but i certainly
did.

"now, please try to behave yourself," he continued,
and he bent to softly brush his lips against mine.

i held properly still. then i sighed.

"you promised chief swan that you would have me
home early, remember?

we'd better get going."

"yes, ma'am."

he smiled wistfully and released all of me but one
hand. he led me a few feet through the tall, wet ferns
and draping moss, around a massive hemlock tree,
and we were there, on the edge of an enormous open
field in the lap of the olympic peaks. it was twice the
size of any baseball stadium.

397 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i could see the others all there; esme, emmett, and
rosalie, sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were
the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. much
farther out i could see jasper and alice, at least a
quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something
back and forth, but i never saw any ball. it looked like
carlisle was marking bases, but could they really be
that far apart?

when we came into view, the three on the rocks rose.

esme started toward us. emmett followed after a long
look at rosalie's back; rosalie had risen gracefully
and strode off toward the field without a glance in our
direction. my stomach quivered uneasily in response.

"was that you we heard, edward?" esme asked as
she approached.

"it sounded like a bear choking," emmett clarified. i
smiled hesitantly at esme. "that was him."

"bella was being unintentionally funny," edward
explained, quickly settling the score.

alice had left her position and was running, or
dancing, toward us. she hurtled to a fluid stop at our
feet. "it's time," she announced. as soon as she spoke,
a deep rumble of thunder shook the forest beyond us,
and then crashed westward toward town.

"eerie, isn't it?" emmett said with easy familiarity,
winking at me.

"let's go." alice reached for emmett's hand and they
darted toward the oversized field; she ran like a

398 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
gazelle. he was nearly as graceful and just as fast -
yet emmett could never be compared to a gazelle.

"are you ready for some ball?" edward asked, his eyes
eager, bright. i tried to sound appropriately
enthusiastic. "go team!" he snickered and, after
mussing my hair, bounded off after the other two. his
run was more aggressive, a cheetah rather than a
gazelle, and he quickly overtook them. the grace and
power took my breath away.

"shall we go down?" esme asked in her soft, melodic
voice, and i realized i was staring openmouthed after
him. i quickly reassembled my expression and
nodded. esme kept a few feet between us, and i
wondered if she was still being careful not to frighten
me. she matched her stride to mine without seeming
impatient at the pace.

"you don't play with them?" i asked shyly.

"no, i prefer to referee - i like keeping them honest,"
she explained.

"do they like to cheat, then?"

"oh yes - you should hear the arguments they get
into! actually, i hope you don't, you would think they
were raised by a pack of wolves."

"you sound like my mom," i laughed, surprised.

she laughed, too. "well, i do think of them as my
children in most ways. i never could get over my
mothering instincts - did edward tell you i had lost a
child?"

399 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no," i murmured, stunned, scrambling to
understand what lifetime she was remembering.

"yes, my first and only baby. he died just a few days
after he was born, the poor tiny thing," she sighed. "it
broke my heart - that's why i jumped off the cliff,
you know," she added matter-of-factly.

"edward just said you f-fell," i stammered.

"always the gentleman." she smiled. "edward was the
first of my new sons. i've always thought of him that
way, even though he's older than i, in one way at
least." she smiled at me warmly. "that's why i'm so
happy that he's found you, dear." the endearment
sounded very natural on her lips.

"he's been the odd man out for far too long; it's hurt
me to see him alone."

"you don't mind, then?" i asked, hesitant again. "that
i'm all wrong for him?"

"no." she was thoughtful. "you're what he wants. it
will work out, somehow," she said, though her
forehead creased with worry. another peal of thunder
began.

esme stopped then; apparently, we'd reached the
edge of the field. it looked as if they had formed
teams. edward was far out in left field, carlisle stood
between the first and second bases, and alice held
the ball, positioned on the spot that must be the
pitcher's mound. emmett was swinging an aluminum
bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. i
waited for him to approach home plate, but then i

400 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
realized, as he took his stance, that he was already
there - farther from the pitcher's mound than i
would have thought possible. jasper stood several
feet behind him, catching for the other team. of
course, none of them had gloves.

"all right," esme called in a clear voice, which i knew
even edward would hear, as far out as he was.
"batter up."

alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. her style
seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating
windup. she held the ball in both hands at her waist,
and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand
flicked out and the ball smacked into jasper's hand.

"was that a strike?" i whispered to esme.

"if they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me. jasper
hurled the ball back to alice's waiting hand. she
permitted herself a brief grin. and then her hand
spun out again.

this time the bat somehow made it around in time to
smash into the invisible ball. the crack of impact was
shattering, thunderous; it echoed off the mountains
- i immediately understood the necessity of the
thunderstorm.

the ball shot like a meteor above the field, flying deep
into the surrounding forest.

"home run," i murmured.

"wait," esme cautioned, listening intently, one hand
raised. emmett was a blur around the bases, carlisle
shadowing him. i realized edward was missing.
401 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"out!" esme cried in a clear voice. i stared in disbelief
as edward sprang from the fringe of the trees, ball in
his upraised hand, his wide grin visible even to me.

"emmett hits the hardest," esme explained, "but
edward runs the fastest." the inning continued
before my incredulous eyes. it was impossible to keep
up with the speed at which the ball flew, the rate at
which their bodies raced around the field.

i learned the other reason they waited for a
thunderstorm to play when jasper, trying to avoid
edward's infallible fielding, hit a ground ball toward
carlisle. carlisle ran into the ball, and then raced
jasper to first base. when they collided, the sound
was like the crash of two massive falling boulders. i
jumped up in concern, but they were somehow
unscathed.

"safe," esme called in a calm voice.

emmett's team was up by one - rosalie managed to
flit around the bases after tagging up on one of
emmett's long flies - when edward caught the third
out. he sprinted to my side, sparkling with
excitement.

"what do you think?" he asked.

"one thing's for sure, i'll never be able to sit through
dull old major league baseball again."

"and it sounds like you did so much of that before,"
he laughed.

"i am a little disappointed," i teased.

402 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why?" he asked, puzzled.

"well, it would be nice if i could find just one thing
you didn't do better than everyone else on the planet."

he flashed his special crooked smile, leaving me
breathless.

"i'm up," he said, heading for the plate.

he played intelligently, keeping the ball low, out of the
reach of rosalie's always-ready hand in the outfield,
gaining two bases like lightning before emmett could
get the ball back in play. carlisle knocked one so far
out of the field - with a boom that hurt my ears -
that he and edward both made it in. alice slapped
them dainty high fives. the score constantly changed
as the game continued, and they razzed each other
like any street ballplayers as they took turns with the
lead. occasionally esme would call them to order. the
thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as alice had
predicted.

carlisle was up to bat, edward catching, when alice
suddenly gasped. my eyes were on edward, as usual,
and i saw his head snap up to look at her. their eyes
met and something flowed between them in an
instant. he was at my side before the others could
ask alice what was wrong.

"alice?" esme's voice was tense.

"i didn't see - i couldn't tell," she whispered. all the
others were gathered by this time.

"what is it, alice?" carlisle asked with the calm voice
of authority.
403 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"they were traveling much quicker than i thought. i
can see i had the perspective wrong before," she
murmured.

jasper leaned over her, his posture protective. "what
changed?" he asked.

"they heard us playing, and it changed their path,"
she said, contrite, as if she felt responsible for
whatever had frightened her. seven pairs of quick
eyes flashed to my face and away.

"how soon?" carlisle said, turning toward edward. a
look of intense concentration crossed his face.

"less than five minutes. they're running - they want
to play." he scowled.

"can you make it?" carlisle asked him, his eyes
flicking toward me again.

"no, not carrying -" he cut short. "besides, the last
thing we need is for them to catch the scent and start
hunting."

"how many?" emmett asked alice.

"three," she answered tersely.

"three!" he scoffed. "let them come." the steel bands
of muscle flexed along his massive arms.

for a split second that seemed much longer than it
really was, carlisle deliberated. only emmett seemed
unperturbed; the rest stared at carlisle's face with
anxious eyes.

404 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"let's just continue the game," carlisle finally
decided. his voice was cool and level. "alice said they
were simply curious." all this was said in a flurry of
words that lasted only a few seconds. i had listened
carefully and caught most of it, though i couldn't hear
what esme now asked edward with a silent vibration
of her lips. i only saw the slight shake of his head and
the look of relief on her face.

"you catch, esme," he said. "i'll call it now." and he
planted himself in front of me.

the others returned to the field, warily sweeping the
dark forest with their sharp eyes. alice and esme
seemed to orient themselves around where i stood.

"take your hair down," edward said in a low, even
voice. i obediently slid the rubber band out of my hair
and shook it out around me.

i stated the obvious. "the others are coming now."

"yes, stay very still, keep quiet, and don't move from
my side, please." he hid the stress in his voice well,
but i could hear it. he pulled my long hair forward,
around my face.

"that won't help," alice said softly. "i could smell her
across the field."

"i know." a hint of frustration colored his tone.
carlisle stood at the plate, and the others joined the
game halfheartedly.

"what did esme ask you?" i whispered.

405 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he hesitated for a second before he answered.
"whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly.

the seconds ticked by; the game progressed with
apathy now. no one dared to hit harder than a bunt,
and emmett, rosalie, and jasper hovered in the
infield. now and again, despite the fear that numbed
my brain, i was aware of rosalie's eyes on me. they
were expressionless, but something about the way
she held her mouth made me think she was angry.
edward paid no attention to the game at all, eyes and
mind ranging the forest.

"i'm sorry, bella," he muttered fiercely. "it was stupid,
irresponsible, to expose you like this. i'm so sorry."

i heard his breath stop, and his eyes zeroed in on
right field. he took a half step, angling himself
between me and what was coming. carlisle, emmett,
and the others turned in the same direction, hearing
sounds of passage much too faint for my ears.

406 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 the hunt

they emerged one by one from the forest edge,
ranging a dozen meters apart. the first male into the
clearing fell back immediately, allowing the other
male to take the front, orienting himself around the
tall, dark-haired man in a manner that clearly
displayed who led the pack. the third was a woman;
from this distance, all i could see of her was that her
hair was a startling shade of red.

they closed ranks before they continued cautiously
toward edward's family, exhibiting the natural
respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a
larger, unfamiliar group of its own kind.

as they approached, i could see how different they
were from the cullens. their walk was catlike, a gait
that seemed constantly on the edge of shifting into a
crouch. they dressed in the ordinary gear of
backpackers: jeans and casual button-down shirts in
heavy, weatherproof fabrics. the clothes were frayed,
though, with wear, and they were barefoot. both men
had cropped hair, but the woman's brilliant orange
hair was filled with leaves and debris from the woods.

their sharp eyes carefully took in the more polished,
urbane stance of carlisle, who, flanked by emmett
and jasper, stepped guardedly forward to meet them.
without any seeming communication between them,
they each straightened into a more casual, erect
bearing.

407 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the man in front was easily the most beautiful, his
skin olive-toned beneath the typical pallor, his hair a
glossy black. he was of a medium build, hard-
muscled, of course, but nothing next to emmett's
brawn. he smiled an easy smile, exposing a flash of
gleaming white teeth. the woman was wilder, her eyes
shifting restlessly between the men facing her, and
the loose grouping around me, her chaotic hair
quivering in the slight breeze. her posture was
distinctly feline. the second male hovered
unobtrusively behind them, slighter than the leader,
his light brown hair and regular features both
nondescript. his eyes, though completely still,
somehow seemed the most vigilant.

their eyes were different, too. not the gold or black i
had come to expect, but a deep burgundy color that
was disturbing and sinister. the dark-haired man,
still smiling, stepped toward carlisle.

"we thought we heard a game," he said in a relaxed
voice with the slightest of french accents. "i'm
laurent, these are victoria and james." he gestured
to the vampires beside him.

"i'm carlisle. this is my family, emmett and jasper,
rosalie, esme and alice, edward and bella." he
pointed us out in groups, deliberately not calling
attention to individuals. i felt a shock when he said
my name.

"do you have room for a few more players?" laurent
asked sociably. carlisle matched laurent's friendly
tone. "actually, we were just finishing up. but we'd

408 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
certainly be interested another time. are you planning
to stay in the area for long?"

"we're headed north, in fact, but we were curious to
see who was in the neighborhood. we haven't run into
any company in a long time."

"no, this region is usually empty except for us and the
occasional visitor, like yourselves."

the tense atmosphere had slowly subsided into a
casual conversation; i guessed that jasper was using
his peculiar gift to control the situation.

"what's your hunting range?" laurent casually
inquired. carlisle ignored the assumption behind the
inquiry. "the olympic range here, up and down the
coast ranges on occasion. we keep a permanent
residence nearby. there's another permanent
settlement like ours up near denali."

laurent rocked back on his heels slightly.

"permanent? how do you manage that?" there was
honest curiosity in his voice.

"why don't you come back to our home with us and
we can talk comfortably?" carlisle invited. "it's a
rather long story." james and victoria exchanged a
surprised look at the mention of the word

"home," but laurent controlled his expression better.

"that sounds very interesting, and welcome." his
smile was genial. "we've been on the hunt all the way
down from ontario, and we haven't had the chance to

409 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
clean up in a while." his eyes moved appreciatively
over carlisle's refined appearance.

"please don't take offense, but we'd appreciate it if
you'd refrain from hunting in this immediate area. we
have to stay inconspicuous, you understand," carlisle
explained.

"of course." laurent nodded. "we certainly won't
encroach on your territory. we just ate outside of
seattle, anyway," he laughed. a shiver ran up my
spine.

"we'll show you the way if you'd like to run with us -
emmett and alice, you can go with edward and bella
to get the jeep," he casually added. three things
seemed to happen simultaneously while carlisle was
speaking. my hair ruffled with the light breeze,
edward stiffened, and the second male, james,
suddenly whipped his head around, scrutinizing me,
his nostrils flaring.

a swift rigidity fell on all of them as james lurched
one step forward into a crouch. edward bared his
teeth, crouching in defense, a feral snarl ripping from
his throat.

it was nothing like the playful sounds i'd heard from
him this morning; it was the single most menacing
thing i had ever heard, and chills ran from the crown
of my head to the back of my heels.

"what's this?" laurent exclaimed in open surprise.
neither james nor edward relaxed their aggressive
poses. james feinted slightly to the side, and edward
shifted in response.
410 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"she's with us." carlisle's firm rebuff was directed
toward james. laurent seemed to catch my scent less
powerfully than james, but awareness now dawned
on his face.

"you brought a snack?" he asked, his expression
incredulous as he took an involuntary step forward.

edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his
lip curling high above his glistening, bared teeth.
laurent stepped back again.

"i said she's with us," carlisle corrected in a hard
voice.

"but she's human," laurent protested. the words
were not at all aggressive, merely astounded.

"yes." emmett was very much in evidence at carlisle's
side, his eyes on james. james slowly straightened
out of his crouch, but his eyes never left me, his
nostrils still wide. edward stayed tensed like a lion in
front of me.

when laurent spoke, his tone was soothing - trying
to defuse the sudden hostility. "it appears we have a
lot to learn about each other."

"indeed." carlisle's voice was still cool.

"but we'd like to accept your invitation." his eyes
flicked toward me and back to carlisle. "and, of
course, we will not harm the human girl. we won't
hunt in your range, as i said."

411 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
james glanced in disbelief and aggravation at laurent
and exchanged another brief look with victoria,
whose eyes still flickered edgily from face to face.

carlisle measured laurent's open expression for a
moment before he spoke.

"we'll show you the way. jasper, rosalie, esme?" he
called. they gathered together, blocking me from view
as they converged. alice was instantly at my side, and
emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on james as
he backed toward us.

"let's go, bella." edward's voice was low and bleak.
this whole time i'd been rooted in place, terrified into
absolute immobility. edward had to grip my elbow
and pull sharply to break my trance. alice and
emmett were close behind us, hiding me. i stumbled
alongside edward, still stunned with fear. i couldn't
hear if the main group had left yet. edward's
impatience was almost tangible as we moved at
human speed to the forest edge.

once we were into the trees, edward slung me over
his back without breaking stride. i gripped as tightly
as possible as he took off, the others close on his
heels. i kept my head down, but my eyes, wide with
fright, wouldn't close. they plunged through the now-
black forest like wraiths. the sense of exhilaration
that usually seemed to possess edward as he ran was
completely absent, replaced by a fury that consumed
him and drove him still faster. even with me on his
back, the others trailed behind.

we reached the jeep in an impossibly short time, and
edward barely slowed as he flung me in the backseat.
412 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"strap her in," he ordered emmett, who slid in beside
me. alice was already in the front seat, and edward
was starting the engine. it roared to life and we
swerved backward, spinning around to face the
winding road.

edward was growling something too fast for me to
understand, but it sounded a lot like a string of
profanities.

the jolting trip was much worse this time, and the
darkness only made it more frightening. emmett and
alice both glared out the side windows. we hit the
main road, and though our speed increased, i could
see much better where we were going. and we were
headed south, away from forks.

"where are we going?" i asked.

no one answered. no one even looked at me.

"dammit, edward! where are you taking me?"

"we have to get you away from here - far away -
now." he didn't look back, his eyes on the road. the
speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour.

"turn around! you have to take me home!" i shouted.
i struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the
straps.

"emmett," edward said grimly.

and emmett secured my hands in his steely grasp.

"no! edward! no, you can't do this."

"i have to, bella, now please be quiet."
413 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i won't! you have to take me back - charlie will call
the fbi! they'll be all over your family - carlisle and
esme! they'll have to leave, to hide forever!"

"calm down, bella." his voice was cold. "we've been
there before."

"not over me, you don't! you're not ruining everything
over me!" i struggled violently, with total futility.

alice spoke for the first time. "edward, pull over." he
flashed her a hard look, and then sped up.

"edward, let's just talk this through."

"you don't understand," he roared in frustration. i'd
never heard his voice so loud; it was deafening in the
confines of the jeep. the speedometer neared one
hundred and fifteen. "he's a tracker, alice, did you
see that? he's a tracker!"

i felt emmett stiffen next to me, and i wondered at his
reaction to the word. it meant something more to the
three of them than it did to me; i wanted to
understand, but there was no opening for me to ask.

"pull over, edward." alice's tone was reasonable, but
there was a ring of authority in it i'd never heard
before.

the speedometer inched passed one-twenty.

"do it, edward."

"listen to me, alice. i saw his mind. tracking is his
passion, his obsession - and he wants her, alice -
her, specifically. he begins the hunt tonight."

414 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"he doesn't know where -"

he interrupted her. "how long do you think it will
take him to cross her scent in town? his plan was
already set before the words were out of laurent's
mouth."

i gasped, knowing where my scent would lead.
"charlie! you can't leave him there! you can't leave
him!" i thrashed against the harness.

"she's right," alice said.

the car slowed slightly.

"let's just look at our options for a minute," alice
coaxed. the car slowed again, more noticeably, and
then suddenly we screeched to a stop on the shoulder
of the highway. i flew against the harness, and then
slammed back into the seat.

"there are no options," edward hissed.

"i'm not leaving charlie!" i yelled.

he ignored me completely.

"we have to take her back," emmett finally spoke.

"no." edward was absolute.

"he's no match for us, edward. he won't be able to
touch her."

"he'll wait."

emmett smiled. "i can wait, too."

415 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you didn't see - you don't understand. once he
commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. we'd have to kill
him."

emmett didn't seem upset by the idea. "that's an
option."

"and the female. she's with him. if it turns into a
fight, the leader will go with them, too."

"there are enough of us."

"there's another option," alice said quietly.

edward turned on her in fury, his voice a blistering
snarl. "there - is -

no - other - option!"

emmett and i both stared at him in shock, but alice
seemed unsurprised. the silence lasted for a long
minute as edward and alice stared each other down.

i broke it. "does anyone want to hear my plan?"

"no," edward growled. alice glared at him, finally
provoked.

"listen," i pleaded. "you take me back."

"no," he interrupted.

i glared at him and continued. "you take me back. i
tell my dad i want to go home to phoenix. i pack my
bags. we wait till this tracker is watching, and then
we run. he'll follow us and leave charlie alone.
charlie won't call the fbi on your family. then you
can take me any damned place you want."

416 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
they stared at me, stunned.

"it's not a bad idea, really." emmett's surprise was
definitely an insult.

"it might work - and we simply can't leave her father
unprotected. you know that," alice said.

everyone looked at edward.

"it's too dangerous - i don't want him within a
hundred miles of her." emmett was supremely
confident. "edward, he's not getting through us." alice
thought for a minute. "i don't see him attacking. he'll
try to wait for us to leave her alone."

"it won't take long for him to realize that's not going to
happen."

"i demand that you take me home." i tried to sound
firm. edward pressed his fingers to his temples and
squeezed his eyes shut.

"please," i said in a much smaller voice.

he didn't look up. when he spoke, his voice sounded
worn.

"you're leaving tonight, whether the tracker sees or
not. you tell charlie that you can't stand another
minute in forks. tell him whatever story works. pack
the first things your hands touch, and then get in
your truck. i don't care what he says to you. you have
fifteen minutes. do you hear me? fifteen minutes
from the time you cross the doorstep." the jeep
rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires

417 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
squealing. the needle on the speedometer started to
race up the dial.

"emmett?" i asked, looking pointedly at my hands.

"oh, sorry." he let me loose.

a few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar
of the engine. then edward spoke again.

"this is how it's going to happen. when we get to the
house, if the tracker is not there, i will walk her to the
door. then she has fifteen minutes." he glared at me
in the rearview mirror. "emmett, you take the outside
of the house. alice, you get the truck. i'll be inside as
long as she is. after she's out, you two can take the
jeep home and tell carlisle."

"no way," emmett broke in. "i'm with you."

"think it through, emmett. i don't know how long i'll
be gone."

"until we know how far this is going to go, i'm with
you." edward sighed. "if the tracker is there," he
continued grimly, "we keep driving."

"we're going to make it there before him," alice said
confidently. edward seemed to accept that. whatever
his problem with alice was, he didn't doubt her now.

"what are we going to do with the jeep?" she asked.
his voice had a hard edge. "you're driving it home."

"no, i'm not," she said calmly.

the unintelligible stream of profanities started again.

418 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"we can't all fit in my truck," i whispered.

edward didn't appear to hear me.

"i think you should let me go alone," i said even more
quietly. he heard that.

"bella, please just do this my way, just this once," he
said between clenched teeth.

"listen, charlie's not an imbecile," i protested. "if
you're not in town tomorrow, he's going to get
suspicious."

"that's irrelevant. we'll make sure he's safe, and
that's all that matters."

"then what about this tracker? he saw the way you
acted tonight. he's going to think you're with me,
wherever you are."

emmett looked at me, insultingly surprised again.
"edward, listen to her," he urged. "i think she's right."

"yes, she is," alice agreed.

"i can't do that." edward's voice was icy.

"emmett should stay, too," i continued. "he definitely
got an eyeful of emmett."

"what?" emmett turned on me.

"you'll get a better crack at him if you stay," alice
agreed. edward stared at her incredulously. "you
think i should let her go alone?"

"of course not," alice said. "jasper and i will take
her."
419 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i can't do that," edward repeated, but this time there
was a trace of defeat in his voice. the logic was
working on him.

i tried to be persuasive. "hang out here for a week -"
i saw his expression in the mirror and amended "- a
few days. let charlie see you haven't kidnapped me,
and lead this james on a wild-goose chase. make
sure he's completely off my trail. then come and meet
me. take a roundabout route, of course, and then
jasper and alice can go home." i could see him
beginning to consider it.

"meet you where?"

"phoenix." of course.

"no. he'll hear that's where you're going," he said
impatiently.

"and you'll make it look like that's a ruse, obviously.
he'll know that we'll know that he's listening. he'll
never believe i'm actually going where i say i am
going."

"she's diabolical," emmett chuckled.

"and if that doesn't work?"

"there are several million people in phoenix," i
informed him.

"it's not that hard to find a phone book."

"i won't go home."

"oh?" he inquired, a dangerous note in his voice.

420 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm quite old enough to get my own place."

"edward, we'll be with her," alice reminded him.

"what are you going to do in phoenix?" he asked her
scathingly.

"stay indoors."

"i kind of like it." emmett was thinking about
cornering james, no doubt.

"shut up, emmett."

"look, if we try to take him down while she's still
around, there's a much better chance that someone
will get hurt - she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to
protect her. now, if we get him alone" he trailed off
with a slow smile. i was right.

the jeep was crawling slowly along now as we drove
into town. despite my brave talk, i could feel the hairs
on my arms standing up. i thought about charlie,
alone in the house, and tried to be courageous.

"bella." edward's voice was very soft. alice and
emmett looked out their windows. "if you let anything
happen to yourself- anything at all - i'm holding
you personally responsible. do you understand that?"

"yes," i gulped.

he turned to alice.

"can jasper handle this?"

"give him some credit, edward. he's been doing very,
very well, all things considered."

421 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"can you handle this?" he asked.

and graceful little alice pulled back her lips in a
horrific grimace and let loose with a guttural snarl
that had me cowering against the seat in terror.

edward smiled at her. "but keep your opinions to
yourself," he muttered suddenly.

422 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 goodbyes

charlie was waiting up for me. all the house lights
were on. my mind was blank as i tried to think of a
way to make him let me go. this wasn't going to be
pleasant.

edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my
truck. all three of them were acutely alert, ramrod
straight in their seats, listening to every sound of the
wood, looking through every shadow, catching every
scent, searching for something out of place. the
engine cut off, and i sat, motionless, as they
continued to listen.

"he's not here," edward said tensely. "let's go."
emmett reached over to help me get out of the
harness.

"don't worry, bella," he said in a low but cheerful
voice, "we'll take care of things here quickly."

i felt moisture filling up my eyes as i looked at
emmett. i barely knew him, and yet, somehow, not
knowing when i would see him again after tonight
was anguishing. i knew this was just a faint taste of
the goodbyes i would have to survive in the next hour,
and the thought made the tears begin to spill.

"alice, emmett." edward's voice was a command.
they slithered soundlessly into the darkness,
instantly disappearing. edward opened my door and
took my hand, then drew me into the protecting

423 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
enclosure of his arm. he walked me swiftly toward the
house, eyes always roving through the night.

"fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath.

"i can do this." i sniffled. my tears had given me an
inspiration. i stopped on the porch and took hold of
his face in my hands. i looked fiercely into his eyes.

"i love you," i said in a low, intense voice. "i will
always love you, no matter what happens now."

"nothing is going to happen to you, bella," he said
just as fiercely.

"just follow the plan, okay? keep charlie safe for me.
he's not going to like me very much after this, and i
want to have the chance to apologize later."

"get inside, bella. we have to hurry." his voice was
urgent.

"one more thing," i whispered passionately. "don't
listen to another word i say tonight!" he was leaning
in, and so all i had to do was stretch up on my toes to
kiss his surprised, frozen lips with as much force as i
was capable of. then i turned and kicked the door
open.

"go away, edward!" i yelled at him, running inside
and slamming the door shut in his still-shocked face.

"bella?" charlie had been hovering in the living room,
and he was already on his feet.

"leave me alone!" i screamed at him through my
tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. i ran up

424 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
the stairs to my room, throwing the door shut and
locking it. i ran to my bed, flinging myself on the floor
to retrieve my duffel bag. i reached swiftly between
the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old
sock that contained my secret cash hoard. charlie
was pounding on my door.

"bella, are you okay? what's going on?" his voice was
frightened.

"i'm going borne," i shouted, my voice breaking in the
perfect spot.

"did he hurt you?" his tone edged toward anger.

"no!" i shrieked a few octaves higher. i turned to my
dresser, and edward was already there, silently
yanking out armfuls of random clothes, which he
proceeded to throw to me.

"did he break up with you?" charlie was perplexed.

"no!" i yelled, slightly more breathless as i shoved
everything into the bag. edward threw another
drawer's contents at me. the bag was pretty much
full now.

"what happened, bella?" charlie shouted through the
door, pounding again.

"i broke up with him!" i shouted back, jerking on the
zipper of my bag. edward's capable hands pushed
mine away and zipped it smoothly. he put the strap
carefully over my arm.

"i'll be in the truck - go!" he whispered, and pushed
me toward the door. he vanished out the window.
425 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i unlocked the door and pushed past charlie roughly,
struggling with my heavy bag as i ran down the
stairs.

"what happened?" he yelled. he was right behind me.
"i thought you liked him."

he caught my elbow in the kitchen. though he was
still bewildered, his grip was firm.

he spun me around to look at him, and i could see in
his face that he had no intention of letting me leave. i
could think of only one way to escape, and it involved
hurting him so much that i hated myself for even
considering it. but i had no time, and i had to keep
him safe. i glared up at my father, fresh tears in my
eyes for what i was about to do.

"i do like him - that's the problem. i can't do this
anymore! i can't put down any more roots here! i
don't want to end up trapped in this stupid, boring
town like mom! i'm not going to make the same dumb
mistake she did. i hate it - i can't stay here another
minute!"

his hand dropped from my arm like i'd electrocuted
him. i turned away from his shocked, wounded face
and headed for the door.

"bells, you can't leave now. it's nighttime," he
whispered behind me. i didn't turn around. "i'll sleep
in the truck if i get tired."

"just wait another week," he pled, still shell-shocked.
"rene will be back by then."

this completely derailed me. "what?"
426 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
charlie continued eagerly, almost babbling with relief
as i hesitated.

"she called while you were out. things aren't going so
well in florida, and if phil doesn't get signed by the
end of the week, they're going back to arizona. the
assistant coach of the sidewinders said they might
have a spot for another shortstop."

i shook my head, trying to reassemble my now-
confused thoughts. every passing second put charlie
in more danger.

"i have a key," i muttered, turning the knob. he was
too close, one hand extended toward me, his face
dazed. i couldn't lose any more time arguing with
him. i was going to have to hurt him further.

"just let me go, charlie." i repeated my mother's last
words as she'd walked out this same door so many
years ago. i said them as angrily as i could manage,
and i threw the door open. "it didn't work out, okay? i
really, really hate forks!"

my cruel words did their job - charlie stayed frozen
on the doorstep, stunned, while i ran into the night. i
was hideously frightened of the empty yard. i ran
wildly for the truck, visualizing a dark shadow behind
me. i threw my bag in the bed and wrenched the door
open. the key was waiting in the ignition.

"i'll call you tomorrow!" i yelled, wishing more than
anything that i could explain everything to him right
then, knowing i would never be able to. i gunned the
engine and peeled out.

427 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
edward reached for my hand.

"pull over," he said as the house, and charlie,
disappeared behind us.

"i can drive," i said through the tears pouring down
my cheeks. his long hands unexpectedly gripped my
waist, and his foot pushed mine off the gas pedal. he
pulled me across his lap, wrenching my hands free of
the wheel, and suddenly he was in the driver's seat.
the truck didn't swerve an inch.

"you wouldn't be able to find the house," he
explained. lights flared suddenly behind us. i stared
out the back window, eyes wide with horror.

"it's just alice," he reassured me. he took my hand
again. my mind was filled with the image of charlie in
the doorway. "the tracker?"

"he heard the end of your performance," edward said
grimly.

"charlie?" i asked in dread.

"the tracker followed us. he's running behind us
now." my body went cold.

"can we outrun him?"

"no." but he sped up as he spoke. the truck's engine
whined in protest. my plan suddenly didn't feel so
brilliant anymore.

i was staring back at alice's headlights when the
truck shuddered and a dark shadow sprung up
outside the window.

428 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
my bloodcurdling scream lasted a fraction of a second
before edward's hand clamped down on my mouth.

"it's emmett!"

he released my mouth, and wound his arm around
my waist.

"it's okay, bella," he promised. "you're going to be
safe." we raced through the quiet town toward the
north highway.

"i didn't realize you were still so bored with small-
town life," he said conversationally, and i knew he
was trying to distract me. "it seemed like you were
adjusting fairly well - especially recently. maybe i
was just flattering myself that i was making life more
interesting for you."

"i wasn't being nice," i confessed, ignoring his attempt
at diversion, looking down at my knees. "that was the
same thing my mom said when she left him. you
could say i was hitting below the belt."

"don't worry. he'll forgive you." he smiled a little,
though it didn't touch his eyes.

i stared at him desperately, and he saw the naked
panic in my eyes.

"bella, it's going to be all right."

"but it won't be all right when i'm not with you," i
whispered.

429 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"we'll be together again in a few days," he said,
tightening his arm around me. "don't forget that this
was your idea."

"it was the best idea - of course it was mine." his
answering smile was bleak and disappeared
immediately.

"why did this happen?" i asked, my voice catching.
"why me?" he stared blackly at the road ahead. "it's
my fault - i was a fool to expose you like that." the
rage in his voice was directed internally.

"that's not what i meant," i insisted. "i was there, big
deal. it didn't bother the other two. why did this
james decide to kill met there're people all over the
place, why me?"

he hesitated, thinking before he answered.

"i got a good look at his mind tonight," he began in a
low voice. "i'm not sure if there's anything i could
have done to avoid this, once he saw you. it is
partially your fault." his voice was wry. "if you didn't
smell so appallingly luscious, he might not have
bothered. but when i defended you well, that made
it a lot worse. he's not used to being thwarted, no
matter how insignificant the object. he thinks of
himself as a hunter and nothing else. his existence is
consumed with tracking, and a challenge is all he
asks of life. suddenly we've presented him with a
beautiful challenge - a large clan of strong fighters
all bent on protecting the one vulnerable element. you
wouldn't believe how euphoric he is now. it's his
favorite game, and we've just made it his most
exciting game ever." his tone was full of disgust.
430 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he paused a moment.

"but if i had stood by, he would have killed you right
then," he said with hopeless frustration.

"i thought i didn't smell the same to the others as
i do to you," i said hesitantly.

"you don't. but that doesn't mean that you aren't still
a temptation to every one of them. if you had
appealed to the tracker - or any of them -

the same way you appeal to me, it would have meant
a fight right there." i shuddered.

"i don't think i have any choice but to kill him now,"
he muttered.

"carlisle won't like it."

i could hear the tires cross the bridge, though i
couldn't see the river in the dark. i knew we were
getting close. i had to ask him now.

"how can you kill a vampire?"

he glanced at me with unreadable eyes and his voice
was suddenly harsh.

"the only way to be sure is to tear him to shreds, and
then burn the pieces."

"and the other two will fight with him?"

"the woman will. i'm not sure about laurent. they
don't have a very strong bond - he's only with them
for convenience. he was embarrassed by james in the
meadow"

431 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"but james and the woman - they'll try to kill you?"
i asked, my voice raw.

"bella, don't you dare waste time worrying about me.
your only concern is keeping yourself safe and -
please, please - trying not to be reckless."

"is he still following?"

"yes. he won't attack the house, though. not tonight."
he turned off onto the invisible drive, with alice
following behind. we drove right up to the house. the
lights inside were bright, but they did little to alleviate
the blackness of the encroaching forest. emmett had
my door open before the truck was stopped; he pulled
me out of the seat, tucked me like a football into his
vast chest, and ran me through the door.

we burst into the large white room, edward and alice
at our sides. all of them were there; they were already
on their feet at the sound of our approach. laurent
stood in their midst. i could hear low growls rumble
deep in emmett's throat as he set me down next to
edward.

"he's tracking us," edward announced, glaring
balefully at laurent. laurent's face was unhappy. "i
was afraid of that." alice danced to jasper's side and
whispered in his ear; her lips quivered with the speed
of her silent speech. they flew up the stairs together.
rosalie watched them, and then moved quickly to
emmett's side. her beautiful eyes were intense and -
when they flickered unwillingly to my face - furious.

"what will he do?" carlisle asked laurent in chilling
tones.
432 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm sorry," he answered. "i was afraid, when your boy
there defended her, that it would set him off."

"can you stop him?"

laurent shook his head. "nothing stops james when
he gets started."

"we'll stop him," emmett promised. there was no
doubt what he meant.

"you can't bring him down. i've never seen anything
like him in my three hundred years. he's absolutely
lethal. that's why i joined his coven." his coven, i
thought, of course. the show of leadership in the
clearing was merely that, a show.

laurent was shaking his head. he glanced at me,
perplexed, and back to carlisle. "are you sure it's
worth it?"

edward's enraged roar filled the room; laurent
cringed back. carlisle looked gravely at laurent. "i'm
afraid you're going to have to make a choice."

laurent understood. he deliberated for a moment. his
eyes took in every face, and finally swept the bright
room.

"i'm intrigued by the life you've created here. but i
won't get in the middle of this. i bear none of you any
enmity, but i won't go up against james. i think i will
head north - to that clan in denali." he hesitated.

"don't underestimate james. he's got a brilliant mind
and unparalleled senses. he's every bit as comfortable
in the human world as you seem to be, and he won't
433 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
come at you head on i'm sorry for what's been
unleashed here. truly sorry." he bowed his head, but
i saw him flicker another puzzled look at me.

"go in peace," was carlisle's formal answer.

laurent took another long look around himself, and
then he hurried out the door.

the silence lasted less than a second.

"how close?" carlisle looked to edward.

esme was already moving; her hand touched an
inconspicuous keypad on the wall, and with a groan,
huge metal shutters began sealing up the glass wall. i
gaped.

"about three miles out past the river; he's circling
around to meet up with the female."

"what's the plan?"

"we'll lead him off, and then jasper and alice will run
her south."

"and then?"

edward's tone was deadly. "as soon as bella is clear,
we hunt him."

"i guess there's no other choice," carlisle agreed, his
face grim. edward turned to rosalie.

"get her upstairs and trade clothes," edward
commanded. she stared back at him with livid
disbelief.

434 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"why should i?" she hissed. "what is she to me?
except a menace - a danger you've chosen to inflict
on all of us."

i flinched back from the venom in her voice.

"rose" emmett murmured, putting one hand on her
shoulder. she shook it off.

but i was watching edward carefully, knowing his
temper, worried about his reaction.

he surprised me. he looked away from rosalie as if
she hadn't spoken, as if she didn't exist.

"esme?" he asked calmly.

"of course," esme murmured.

esme was at my side in half a heartbeat, swinging me
up easily into her arms, and dashing up the stairs
before i could gasp in shock.

"what are we doing?" i asked breathlessly as she set
me down in a dark room somewhere off the second-
story hall.

"trying to confuse the smell. it won't work for long,
but it might help get you out." i could hear her
clothes falling to the floor.

"i don't think i'll fit" i hesitated, but her hands were
abruptly pulling my shirt over my head. i quickly
stripped my jeans off myself. she handed me
something, it felt like a shirt. i struggled to get my
arms through the right holes. as soon as i was done
she handed me her slacks. i yanked them on, but i

435 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
couldn't get my feet out; they were too long. she deftly
rolled the hems a few times so i could stand.
somehow she was already in my clothes. she pulled
me back to the stairs, where alice stood, a small
leather bag in one hand. they each grabbed one of my
elbows and half-carried me as they flew down the
stairs.

it appeared that everything had been settled
downstairs in our absence. edward and emmett were
ready to leave, emmett carrying a heavy-looking
backpack over his shoulder. carlisle was handing
something small to esme. he turned and handed
alice the same thing - it was a tiny silver cell phone.

"esme and rosalie will be taking your truck, bella,"
he told me as he passed. i nodded, glancing warily at
rosalie. she was glowering at carlisle with a resentful
expression.

"alice, jasper - take the mercedes. you'll need the
dark tint in the south."

they nodded as well.

"we're taking the jeep."

i was surprised to see that carlisle intended to go
with edward. i realized suddenly, with a stab of fear,
that they made up the hunting party.

"alice," carlisle asked, "will they take the bait?"
everyone watched alice as she closed her eyes and
became incredibly still. finally her eyes opened. "he'll
track you. the woman will follow the truck. we

436 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
should be able to leave after that." her voice was
certain.

"let's go." carlisle began to walk toward the kitchen.
but edward was at my side at once. he caught me up
in his iron grip, crushing me to him. he seemed
unaware of his watching family as he pulled my face
to his, lifting my feet off the floor. for the shortest
second, his lips were icy and hard against mine. then
it was over. he set me down, still holding my face, his
glorious eyes burning into mine. his eyes went blank,
curiously dead, as he turned away.

and they were gone.

we stood there, the others looking away from me as
the tears streaked noiselessly down my face.

the silent moment dragged on, and then esme's
phone vibrated in her hand. it flashed to her ear.

"now," she said. rosalie stalked out the front door
without another glance in my direction, but esme
touched my cheek as she passed.

"be safe." her whisper lingered behind them as they
slipped out the door. i heard my truck start
thunderously, and then fade away.

jasper and alice waited. alice's phone seemed to be
at her ear before it buzzed.

"edward says the woman is on esme's trail. i'll get the
car." she vanished into the shadows the way edward
had gone.

437 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
jasper and i looked at each other. he stood across
the length of the entryway from me being careful.

"you're wrong, you know," he said quietly.

"what?" i gasped.

"i can feel what you're feeling now - and you are
worth it."

"i'm not," i mumbled. "if anything happens to them, it
will be for nothing."

"you're wrong," he repeated, smiling kindly at me. i
heard nothing, but then alice stepped through the
front door and came toward me with her arms held
out.

"may i?" she asked.

"you're the first one to ask permission." i smiled
wryly. she lifted me in her slender arms as easily as
emmett had, shielding me protectively, and then we
flew out the door, leaving the lights bright behind us.

438 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 impatience

when i woke up i was confused. my thoughts were
hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it
took me longer than it should have to realize where i
was.

this room was too bland to belong anywhere but in a
hotel. the bedside lamps, bolted to the tables, were a
dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from
the same fabric as the bedspread, and the generic
watercolor prints on the walls.

i tried to remember how i got here, but nothing came
at first. i did remember the sleek black car, the glass
in the windows darker than that on a limousine. the
engine was almost silent, though we'd raced across
the black freeways at more than twice the legal speed.
and i remembered alice sitting with me on the dark
leather backseat. somehow, during the long night, my
head had ended up against her granite neck. my
closeness didn't seem to bother her at all, and her
cool, hard skin was oddly comforting to me. the front
of her thin cotton shirt was cold, damp with the tears
that streamed from my eyes until, red and sore, they
ran dry.

sleep had evaded me; my aching eyes strained open
even though the night finally ended and dawn broke
over a low peak somewhere in california. the gray
light, streaking across the cloudless sky, stung my
eyes. but i couldn't close them; when i did, the
images that flashed all too vividly, like still slides
439 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
behind my lids, were unbearable. charlie's broken
expression - edward's brutal snarl, teeth bared -
rosalie's resentful glare - the keen-eyed scrutiny of
the tracker - the dead look in edward's eyes after he
kissed me the last time i couldn't stand to see
them. so i fought against my weariness and the sun
rose higher.

i was still awake when we came through a shallow
mountain pass and the sun, behind us now, reflected
off the tiled rooftops of the valley of the sun. i didn't
have enough emotion left to be surprised that we'd
made a three-day journey in one. i stared blankly at
the wide, flat expanse laid out in front of me. phoenix
- the palm trees, the scrubby creosote, the
haphazard lines of the intersecting freeways, the
green swaths of golf courses and turquoise splotches
of swimming pools, all submerged in a thin smog and
embraced by the short, rocky ridges that weren't
really big enough to be called mountains.

the shadows of the palm trees slanted across the
freeway - defined, sharper than i remembered, paler
than they should be. nothing could hide in these
shadows. the bright, open freeway seemed benign
enough. but i felt no relief, no sense of homecoming.

"which way to the airport, bella?" jasper had asked,
and i flinched, though his voice was quite soft and
un-alarming. it was the first sound, besides the purr
of the car, to break the long night's silence.

"stay on the i-ten," i'd answered automatically. "we'll
pass right by it." my brain had worked slowly through
the fog of sleep deprivation.

440 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"are we flying somewhere?" i'd asked alice.

"no, but it's better to be close, just in case." i
remembered beginning the loop around sky harbor
international but not ending it. i suppose that must
have been when i'd fallen asleep. though, now that i'd
chased the memories down, i did have a vague
impression of leaving the car - the sun was just
falling behind the horizon - my arm draped over
alice's shoulder and her arm firm around my waist,
dragging me along as i stumbled through the warm,
dry shadows. i had no memory of this room.

i looked at the digital clock on the nightstand. the red
numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they gave
no indication if it was night or day. no edge of light
escaped the thick curtains, but the room was bright
with the light from the lamps.

i rose stiffly and staggered to the window, pulling
back the drapes. it was dark outside. three in the
morning, then. my room looked out on a deserted
section of the freeway and the new long-term parking
garage for the airport. it was slightly comforting to be
able to pinpoint time and place.

i looked down at myself. i was still wearing esme's
clothes, and they didn't fit very well at all. i looked
around the room, glad when i discovered my duffel
bag on top of the low dresser.

i was on my way to find new clothes when a light tap
on the door made me jump.

"can i come in?" alice asked.

441 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i took a deep breath. "sure."

she walked in, and looked me over cautiously. "you
look like you could sleep longer," she said.

i just shook my head.

she drifted silently to the curtains and closed them
securely before turning back to me.

"we'll need to stay inside," she told me.

"okay." my voice was hoarse; it cracked.

"thirsty?" she asked.

i shrugged. "i'm okay. how about you?"

"nothing unmanageable." she smiled. "i ordered some
food for you, it's in the front room. edward reminded
me that you have to eat a lot more frequently than we
do."

i was instantly more alert. "he called?"

"no," she said, and watched as my face fell. "it was
before we left." she took my hand carefully and led
me through the door into the living room of the hotel
suite. i could hear a low buzz of voices coming from
the tv. jasper sat motionlessly at the desk in the
corner, his eyes watching the news with no glimmer
of interest.

i sat on the floor next to the coffee table, where a tray
of food waited, and began picking at it without
noticing what i was eating. alice perched on the arm
of the sofa and stared blankly at the tv like jasper.

442 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i ate slowly, watching her, turning now and then to
glance quickly at jasper. it began to dawn on me that
they were too still. they never looked away from the
screen, though commercials were playing now. i
pushed the tray away, my stomach abruptly uneasy.
alice looked down at me.

"what's wrong, alice?" i asked.

"nothing's wrong." her eyes were wide, honest and i
didn't trust them.

"what do we do now?"

"we wait for carlisle to call."

"and should he have called by now?" i could see that i
was near the mark. alice's eyes flitted from mine to
the phone on top of her leather bag and back.

"what does that mean?" my voice quavered, and i
fought to control it.

"that he hasn't called yet?"

"it just means that they don't have anything to tell
us." but her voice was too even, and the air was
harder to breathe. jasper was suddenly beside alice,
closer to me than usual.

"bella," he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "you
have nothing to worry about. you are completely safe
here."

"i know that."

443 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"then why are you frightened?" he asked, confused.
he might feel the tenor of my emotions, but he
couldn't read the reasons behind them.

"you heard what laurent said." my voice was just a
whisper, but i was sure they could hear me. "he said
james was lethal. what if something goes wrong, and
they get separated? if something happens to any of
them, carlisle, emmett edward" i gulped. "if that
wild female hurts esme" my voice had grown
higher, a note of hysteria beginning to rise in it. "how
could i live with myself when it's my fault? none of
you should be risking yourselves for me -"

"bella, bella, stop," he interrupted me, his words
pouring out so quickly they were hard to understand.
"you're worrying about all the wrong things, bella.
trust me on this - none of us are in jeopardy. you
are under too much strain as it is; don't add to it with
wholly unnecessary worries. listen to me!" he
ordered, for i had looked away. "our family is strong.
our only fear is losing you."

"but why should you -"

alice interrupted this time, touching my cheek with
her cold fingers.

"it's been almost a century that edward's been alone.
now he's found you. you can't see the changes that
we see, we who have been with him for so long. do
you think any of us want to look into his eyes for the
next hundred years if he loses you?"

444 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
my guilt slowly subsided as i looked into her dark
eyes. but, even as the calm spread over me, i knew i
couldn't trust my feelings with jasper there.

it was a very long day.

we stayed in the room. alice called down to the front
desk and asked them to ignore our maid service for
now. the windows stayed shut, the tv on, though no
one watched it. at regular intervals, food was
delivered for me. the silver phone resting on alice's
bag seemed to grow bigger as the hours passed.

my babysitters handled the suspense better than i
did. as i fidgeted and paced, they simply grew more
still, two statues whose eyes followed me
imperceptibly as i moved. i occupied myself with
memorizing the room; the striped pattern of the
couches, tan, peach, cream, dull gold, and tan again.
sometimes i stared at the abstract prints, randomly
finding pictures in the shapes, like i'd found pictures
in the clouds as a child. i traced a blue hand, a
woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. but when
the pale red circle became a staring eye, i looked
away. as the afternoon wore on, i went back to bed,
simply for something to do. i hoped that by myself in
the dark, i could give in to the terrible fears that
hovered on the edge of my consciousness, unable to
break through under jasper's careful supervision.

but alice followed me casually, as if by some
coincidence she had grown tired of the front room at
the same time. i was beginning to wonder exactly
what sort of instructions edward had given her. i lay
across the bed, and she sat, legs folded, next to me. i

445 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
ignored her at first, suddenly tired enough to sleep.
but after a few minutes, the panic that had held off in
jasper's presence began to make itself known. i gave
up on the idea of sleep quickly then, curling up into a
small ball, wrapping my arms around my legs.

"alice?" i asked.

"yes?"

i kept my voice very calm. "what do you think they're
doing?"

"carlisle wanted to lead the tracker as far north as
possible, wait for him to get close, and then turn and
ambush him. esme and rosalie were supposed to
head west as long as they could keep the female
behind them. if she turned around, they were to head
back to forks and keep an eye on your dad. so i
imagine things are going well if they can't call. it
means the tracker is close enough that they don't
want him to overhear."

"and esme?"

"i think she must be back in forks. she won't call if
there's any chance the female will overhear. i expect
they're all just being very careful."

"do you think they're safe, really?"

"bella, how many times do we have to tell you that
there's no danger to us?"

"would you tell me the truth, though?"

446 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yes. i will always tell you the truth." her voice was
earnest. i deliberated for a moment, and decided she
meant it.

"tell me then how do you become a vampire?"

my question caught her off guard. she was quiet. i
rolled over to look at her, and her expression seemed
ambivalent.

"edward doesn't want me to tell you that," she said
firmly, but i sensed she didn't agree.

"that's not fair. i think i have a right to know."

"i know."

i looked at her, waiting.

she sighed. "he'll be extremely angry."

"it's none of his business. this is between you and
me. alice, as a friend, i'm begging you." and we were
friends now, somehow - as she must have known we
would be all along.

she looked at me with her splendid, wise eyes
choosing.

"i'll tell you the mechanics of it," she said finally, "but
i don't remember it myself, and i've never done it or
seen it done, so keep in mind that i can only tell you
the theory."

i waited.

"as predators, we have a glut of weapons in our
physical arsenal - much, much more than really

447 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
necessary. the strength, the speed, the acute senses,
not to mention those of us like edward, jasper, and i,
who have extra senses as well. and then, like a
carnivorous flower, we are physically attractive to our
prey."

i was very still, remembering how pointedly edward
had demonstrated the same concept for me in the
meadow.

she smiled a wide, ominous smile. "we have another
fairly superfluous weapon. we're also venomous," she
said, her teeth glistening. "the venom doesn't kill -
it's merely incapacitating. it works slowly, spreading
through the bloodstream, so that, once bitten, our
prey is in too much physical pain to escape us. mostly
superfluous, as i said. if we're that close, the prey
doesn't escape. of course, there are always
exceptions. carlisle, for example."

"so if the venom is left to spread" i murmured.

"it takes a few days for the transformation to be
complete, depending on how much venom is in the
bloodstream, how close the venom enters to the heart.
as long as the heart keeps beating, the poison
spreads, healing, changing the body as it moves
through it. eventually the heart stops, and the
conversion is finished. but all that time, every minute
of it, a victim would be wishing for death."

i shivered.

"it's not pleasant, you see."

448 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"edward said that it was very hard to do i don't
quite understand," i said.

"we're also like sharks in a way. once we taste the
blood, or even smell it for that matter, it becomes very
hard to keep from feeding. sometimes impossible. so
you see, to actually bite someone, to taste the blood,
it would begin the frenzy. it's difficult on both sides -
the blood-lust on the one hand, the awful pain on the
other."

"why do you think you don't remember?"

"i don't know. for everyone else, the pain of
transformation is the sharpest memory they have of
their human life. i remember nothing of being
human." her voice was wistful.

we lay silently, wrapped in our individual
meditations.

the seconds ticked by, and i had almost forgotten her
presence, i was so enveloped in my thoughts.

then, without any warning, alice leaped from the bed,
landing lightly on her feet. my head jerked up as i
stared at her, startled.

"something's changed." her voice was urgent, and she
wasn't talking to me anymore.

she reached the door at the same time jasper did. he
had obviously heard our conversation and her sudden
exclamation. he put his hands on her shoulders and
guided her back to the bed, sitting her on the edge.

449 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"what do you see?" he asked intently, staring into her
eyes. her eyes were focused on something very far
away. i sat close to her, leaning in to catch her low,
quick voice.

"i see a room. it's long, and there are mirrors
everywhere. the floor is wooden. he's in the room,
and he's waiting. there's gold a gold stripe across
the mirrors."

"where is the room?"

"i don't know. something is missing - another
decision hasn't been made yet."

"how much time?"

"it's soon. he'll be in the mirror room today, or maybe
tomorrow. it all depends. he's waiting for something.
and he's in the dark now." jasper's voice was calm,
methodical, as he questioned her in a practiced way.
"what is he doing?"

"he's watching tv no, he's running a vcr, in the
dark, in another place."

"can you see where he is?"

"no, it's too dark."

"and the mirror room, what else is there?"

"just the mirrors, and the gold. it's a band, around
the room. and there's a black table with a big stereo,
and a tv. he's touching the vcr

450 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
there, but he doesn't watch the way he does in the
dark room. this is the room where he waits." her eyes
drifted, then focused on jasper's face.

"there's nothing else?"

she shook her head. they looked at each other,
motionless.

"what does it mean?" i asked.

neither of them answered for a moment, then jasper
looked at me.

"it means the tracker's plans have changed. he's
made a decision that will lead him to the mirror room,
and the dark room."

"but we don't know where those rooms are?"

"no."

"but we do know that he won't be in the mountains
north of washington, being hunted. he'll elude them."
alice's voice was bleak.

"should we call?" i asked. they traded a serious look,
undecided. and the phone rang.

alice was across the room before i could lift my head
to look at it. she pushed a button and held the phone
to her ear, but she didn't speak first.

"carlisle," she breathed. she didn't seem surprised or
relieved, the way i felt.

"yes," she said, glancing at me. she listened for a long
moment.

451 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i just saw him." she described again the vision she'd
seen. "whatever made him get on that plane it was
leading him to those rooms." she paused. "yes," alice
said into the phone, and then she spoke to me.

"bella?"

she held the phone out toward me. i ran to it.

"hello?" i breathed.

"bella," edward said.

"oh, edward! i was so worried."

"bella," he sighed in frustration, "i told you not to
worry about anything but yourself." it was so
unbelievably good to hear his voice. i felt the hovering
cloud of despair lighten and drift back as he spoke.

"where are you?"

"we're outside of vancouver. bella, i'm sorry - we
lost him. he seems suspicious of us - he's careful to
stay just far enough away that i can't hear what he's
thinking. but he's gone now - it looks like he got on
a plane. we think he's heading back to forks to start
over." i could hear alice filling in jasper behind me,
her quick words blurring together into a humming
noise.

"i know. alice saw that he got away."

"you don't have to worry, though. he won't find
anything to lead him to you. you just have to stay
there and wait till we find him again."

"i'll be fine. is esme with charlie?"
452 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yes - the female has been in town. she went to the
house, but while charlie was at work. she hasn't
gone near him, so don't be afraid. he's safe with esme
and rosalie watching."

"what is she doing?"

"probably trying to pick up the trail. she's been all
through the town during the night. rosalie traced her
through the airport, all the roads around town, the
school she's digging, bella, but there's nothing to
find."

"and you're sure charlie's safe?"

"yes, esme won't let him out of her sight. and we'll be
there soon. if the tracker gets anywhere near forks,
we'll have him."

"i miss you," i whispered.

"i know, bella. believe me, i know. it's like you've
taken half my self away with you."

"come and get it, then," i challenged.

"soon, as soon as i possibly can. i will make you safe
first." his voice was hard.

"i love you," i reminded him.

"could you believe that, despite everything i've put
you through, i love you, too?"

"yes, i can, actually."

"i'll come for you soon."

"i'll be waiting."
453 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
as soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of
depression began to creep over me again.

i turned to give the phone back to alice and found her
and jasper bent over the table, where alice was
sketching on a piece of hotel stationery. i leaned on
the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder. she
drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner,
square section at the back. the wooden planks that
made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the
room. down the walls were lines denoting the breaks
in the mirrors. and then, wrapping around the walls,
waist high, a long band. the band alice said was gold.

"it's a ballet studio," i said, suddenly recognizing the
familiar shapes. they looked at me, surprised.

"do you know this room?" jasper's voice sounded
calm, but there was an undercurrent of something i
couldn't identify. alice bent her head to her work, her
hand flying across the page now, the shape of an
emergency exit taking shape against the back wall,
the stereo and tv on a low table by the front right
corner.

"it looks like a place i used to go for dance lessons -
when i was eight or nine. it was shaped just the
same." i touched the page where the square section
jutted out, narrowing the back part of the room.
"that's where the bathrooms were - the doors were
through the other dance floor. but the stereo was
here" - i pointed to the left corner - "it was older,
and there wasn't a tv. there was a window in the
waiting room - you would see the room from this

454 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
perspective if you looked through it." alice and jasper
were staring at me.

"are you sure it's the same room?" jasper asked, still
calm.

"no, not at all - i suppose most dance studios would
look the same - the mirrors, the bar." i traced my
finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "it's
just the shape that looked familiar." i touched the
door, set in exactly the same place as the one i
remembered.

"would you have any reason to go there now?" alice
asked, breaking my reverie.

"no, i haven't been there in almost ten years. i was a
terrible dancer -

they always put me in the back for recitals," i
admitted.

"so there's no way it could be connected with you?"
alice asked intently.

"no, i don't even think the same person owns it. i'm
sure it's just another dance studio, somewhere."

"where was the studio you went to?" jasper asked in
a casual voice.

"it was just around the corner from my mom's house.
i used to walk there after school" i said, my voice
trailing off. i didn't miss the look they exchanged.

"here in phoenix, then?" his voice was still casual.

455 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yes," i whispered. "fifty-eighth street and cactus."
we all sat in silence, staring at the drawing.

"alice, is that phone safe?"

"yes," she reassured me. "the number would just
trace back to washington."

"then i can use it to call my mom."

"i thought she was in florida."

"she is - but she's coming home soon, and she can't
come back to that house while" my voice trembled. i
was thinking about something edward had said,
about the red-haired female at charlie's house, at the
school, where my records would be.

"how will you reach her?"

"they don't have a permanent number except at the
house - she's supposed to check her messages
regularly."

"jasper?" alice asked.

he thought about it. "i don't think there's any way it
could hurt - be sure you don't say where you are, of
course."

i reached eagerly for the phone and dialed the familiar
number. it rang four times, and then i heard my
mom's breezy voice telling me to leave a message.

"mom," i said after the beep, "it's me. listen, i need
you to do something. it's important. as soon as you
get this message, call me at this number." alice was
already at my side, writing the number for me on the
456 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
bottom of her picture. i read it carefully, twice. "please
don't go anywhere until you talk to me. don't worry,
i'm okay, but i have to talk to you right away, no
matter how late you get this call, all right? i love you,
mom. bye." i closed my eyes and prayed with all my
might that no unforeseen change of plans would bring
her home before she got my message.

i settled into the sofa, nibbling on a plate of leftover
fruit, anticipating a long evening. i thought about
calling charlie, but i wasn't sure if i should be home
by now or not. i concentrated on the news, watching
out for stories about florida, or about spring training
-

strikes or hurricanes or terrorist attacks - anything
that might send them home early.

immortality must grant endless patience. neither
jasper nor alice seemed to feel the need to do
anything at all. for a while, alice sketched the vague
outline of the dark room from her vision, as much as
she could see in the light from the tv. but when she
was done, she simply sat, looking at the blank walls
with her timeless eyes. jasper, too, seemed to have no
urge to pace, or peek through the curtains, or run
screaming out the door, the way i did.

i must have fallen asleep on the couch, waiting for the
phone to ring again. the touch of alice's cold hands
woke me briefly as she carried me to the bed, but i
was unconscious again before my head hit the pillow.

457 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 phone call

i could feel it was too early again when i woke, and i
knew i was getting the schedule of my days and
nights slowly reversed. i lay in my bed and listened to
the quiet voices of alice and jasper in the other room.
that they were loud enough for me to hear at all was
strange. i rolled till my feet touched the floor and then
staggered to the living room. the clock on the tv said
it was just after two in the morning. alice and jasper
were sitting together on the sofa, alice sketching
again while jasper looked over her shoulder. they
didn't look up when i entered, too engrossed in alice's
work.

i crept to jasper's side to peek.

"did she see something more?" i asked him quietly.

"yes. something's brought him back to the room with
the vcr, but it's light now."

i watched as alice drew a square room with dark
beams across its low ceiling. the walls were paneled
in wood, a little too dark, out of date. the floor had a
dark carpet with a pattern in it. there was a large
window against the south wall, and an opening
through the west wall led to the living room. one side
of that entrance was stone - a large tan stone
fireplace that was open to both rooms. the focus of
the room from this perspective, the tv and vcr,
balanced on a too-small wooden stand, were in the
southwest corner of the room. an aged sectional sofa
458 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
curved around in front of the tv, a round coffee table
in front of it.

"the phone goes there," i whispered, pointing.

two pairs of eternal eyes stared at me.

"that's my mother's house."

alice was already off the couch, phone in hand,
dialing. i stared at the precise rendering of my
mother's family room. uncharacteristically, jasper
slid closer to me. he lightly touched his hand to my
shoulder, and the physical contact seemed to make
his calming influence stronger. the panic stayed dull,
unfocused.

alice's lips were trembling with the speed of her
words, the low buzzing impossible to decipher. i
couldn't concentrate.

"bella," alice said. i looked at her numbly.

"bella, edward is coming to get you. he and emmett
and carlisle are going to take you somewhere, to hide
you for a while."

"edward is coming?" the words were like a life vest,
holding my head above the flood.

"yes, he's catching the first flight out of seattle. we'll
meet him at the airport, and you'll leave with him."

"but, my mother he came here for my mother,
alice!" despite jasper, the hysteria bubbled up in my
voice.

"jasper and i will stay till she's safe."
459 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i can't win, alice. you can't guard everyone i know
forever. don't you see what he's doing? he's not
tracking me at all. he'll find someone, he'll hurt
someone i love alice, i can't -"

"we'll catch him, bella," she assured me.

"and what if you get hurt, alice? do you think that's
okay with me? do you think it's only my human
family he can hurt me with?" alice looked
meaningfully at jasper. a deep, heavy fog of lethargy
washed over me, and my eyes closed without my
permission. my mind struggled against the fog,
realizing what was happening. i forced my eyes open
and stood up, stepping away from jasper's hand.

"i don't want to go back to sleep," i snapped.

i walked to my room and shut the door, slammed it
really, so i could be free to go to pieces privately. this
time alice didn't follow me. for three and a half hours
i stared at the wall, curled in a ball, rocking. my mind
went around in circles, trying to come up with some
way out of this nightmare. there was no escape, no
reprieve. i could see only one possible end looming
darkly in my future. the only question was how many
other people would be hurt before i reached it.

the only solace, the only hope i had left, was knowing
that i would see edward soon. maybe, if i could just
see his face again, i would also be able to see the
solution that eluded me now.

when the phone rang, i returned to the front room, a
little ashamed of my behavior. i hoped i hadn't
offended either of them, that they would know how
460 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
grateful i was for the sacrifices they were making on
my account. alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but
what caught my attention was that, for the first time,
jasper was not in the room. i looked at the clock - it
was five-thirty in the morning.

"they're just boarding their plane," alice told me.
"they'll land at nine-forty-five." just a few more hours
to keep breathing till he was here.

"where's jasper?"

"he went to check out."

"you aren't staying here?"

"no, we're relocating closer to your mother's house."
my stomach twisted uneasily at her words.

but the phone rang again, distracting me. she looked
surprised, but i was already walking forward,
reaching hopefully for the phone.

"hello?" alice asked. "no, she's right here." she held
the phone out to me. your mother, she mouthed.

"hello?"

"bella? bella?" it was my mother's voice, in a familiar
tone i had heard a thousand times in my childhood,
anytime i'd gotten too close to the edge of the
sidewalk or strayed out of her sight in a crowded
place. it was the sound of panic.

i sighed. i'd been expecting this, though i'd tried to
make my message as unalarming as possible without
lessening the urgency of it.

461 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"calm down, mom," i said in my most soothing voice,
walking slowly away from alice. i wasn't sure if i
could lie as convincingly with her eyes on me.
"everything is fine, okay? just give me a minute and
i'll explain everything, i promise."

i paused, surprised that she hadn't interrupted me
yet.

"mom?"

"be very careful not to say anything until i tell you
to." the voice i heard now was as unfamiliar as it was
unexpected. it was a man's tenor voice, a very
pleasant, generic voice - the kind of voice that you
heard in the background of luxury car commercials.
he spoke very quickly.

"now, i don't need to hurt your mother, so please do
exactly as i say, and she'll be fine." he paused for a
minute while i listened in mute horror. "that's very
good," he congratulated. "now repeat after me, and do
try to sound natural. please say, 'no, mom, stay
where you are.'"

"no, mom, stay where you are." my voice was barely
more than a whisper.

"i can see this is going to be difficult." the voice was
amused, still light and friendly. "why don't you walk
into another room now so your face doesn't ruin
everything? there's no reason for your mother to
suffer. as you're walking, please say, 'mom, please
listen to me.' say it now."

462 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. i
walked very slowly to the bedroom, feeling alice's
worried stare on my back. i shut the door behind me,
trying to think clearly through the terror that gripped
my brain.

"there now, are you alone? just answer yes or no."

"yes."

"but they can still hear you, i'm sure."

"yes."

"all right, then," the agreeable voice continued, "say,
'mom, trust me.'"

"mom, trust me."

"this worked out rather better than i expected. i was
prepared to wait, but your mother arrived ahead of
schedule. it's easier this way, isn't it? less suspense,
less anxiety for you."

i waited.

"now i want you to listen very carefully. i'm going to
need you to get away from your friends; do you think
you can do that? answer yes or no."

"no."

"i'm sorry to hear that. i was hoping you would be a
little more creative than that. do you think you could
get away from them if your mother's life depended on
it? answer yes or no."

463 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
somehow, there had to be a way. i remembered that
we were going to the airport. sky harbor international
airport: crowded, confusingly laid out

"yes."

"that's better. i'm sure it won't be easy, but if i get
the slightest hint that you have any company, well,
that would be very bad for your mother," the friendly
voice promised. "you must know enough about us by
now to realize how quickly i would know if you tried
to bring anyone along with you. and how little time i
would need to deal with your mother if that was the
case. do you understand? answer yes or no."

"yes." my voice broke.

"very good, bella. now this is what you have to do. i
want you to go to your mother's house. next to the
phone there will be a number. call it, and i'll tell you
where to go from there." i already knew where i would
go, and where this would end. but i would follow his
instructions exactly. "can you do that? answer yes or
no."

"yes."

"before noon, please, bella. i haven't got all day," he
said politely.

"where's phil?" i asked tersely.

"ah, be careful now, bella. wait until i ask you to
speak, please." i waited.

"it's important, now, that you don't make your friends
suspicious when you go back to them. tell them that
464 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
your mother called, and that you talked her out of
coming home for the time being. now repeat after me,

'thank you, mom.' say it now."

"thank you, mom." the tears were coming. i tried to
fight them back.

"say, 'i love you, mom, i'll see you soon.' say it now."

"i love you, mom." my voice was thick. "i'll see you
soon," i promised.

"goodbye, bella. i look forward to seeing you again."
he hung up. i held the phone to my ear. my joints
were frozen with terror - i couldn't unbend my
fingers to drop it.

i knew i had to think, but my head was filled with the
sound of my mother's panic. seconds ticked by while
i fought for control. slowly, slowly, my thoughts
started to break past that brick wall of pain. to plan.
for i had no choices now but one: to go to the
mirrored room and die. i had no guarantees, nothing
to give to keep my mother alive. i could only hope that
james would be satisfied with winning the game, that
beating edward would be enough. despair gripped
me; there was no way to bargain, nothing i could offer
or withhold that could influence him. but i still had
no choice. i had to try.

i pushed the terror back as well as i could. my
decision was made. it did no good to waste time
agonizing over the outcome. i had to think clearly,
because alice and jasper were waiting for me, and

465 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
evading them was absolutely essential, and absolutely
impossible.

i was suddenly grateful that jasper was gone. if he
had been here to feel my anguish in the last five
minutes, how could i have kept them from being
suspicious? i choked back the dread, the anxiety,
tried to stifle it. i couldn't afford it now. i didn't know
when he would return. i concentrated on my escape. i
had to hope that my familiarity with the airport would
turn the odds in my favor. somehow, i had to keep
alice away

i knew alice was in the other room waiting for me,
curious. but i had to deal with one more thing in
private, before jasper was back. i had to accept that i
wouldn't see edward again, not even one last glimpse
of his face to carry with me to the mirror room. i was
going to hurt him, and i couldn't say goodbye. i let
the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for
a time. then i pushed them back, too, and went to
face alice.

the only expression i could manage was a dull, dead
look. i saw her alarm and i didn't wait for her to ask. i
had just one script and i'd never manage
improvisation now.

"my mom was worried, she wanted to come home. but
it's okay, i convinced her to stay away." my voice was
lifeless.

"we'll make sure she's fine, bella, don't worry." i
turned away; i couldn't let her see my face.

466 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
my eye fell on a blank page of the hotel stationery on
the desk. i went to it slowly, a plan forming. there
was an envelope there, too. that was good.

"alice," i asked slowly, without turning, keeping my
voice level. "if i write a letter for my mother, would
you give it to her? leave it at the house, i mean."

"sure, bella." her voice was careful. she could see me
coming apart at the seams. i had to keep my
emotions under better control. i went into the
bedroom again, and knelt next to the little bedside
table to write.

"edward," i wrote. my hand was shaking, the letters
were hardly legible. i love you. i am so sorry. he has
my mom, and i have to try. i know it may not work. i
am so very, very sorry.

don't be angry with alice and jasper. if i get away
from them it will be a miracle. tell them thank you for
me. alice especially, please. and please, please, don't
come after him. that's what he wants. i think. i can't
bear it if anyone has to be hurt because of me,
especially you. please, this is the only thing i can ask
you now. for me. i love you. forgive me.

bella

i folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the
envelope. eventually he would find it. i only hoped he
would understand, and listen to me just this once.

and then i carefully sealed away my heart.

467 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 hide-and-seek

it had taken much less time than i'd thought - all
the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart.
the minutes were ticking by more slowly than usual.
jasper still hadn't come back when i returned to
alice. i was afraid to be in the same room with her,
afraid that she would guess and afraid to hide from
her for the same reason. i would have thought i was
far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts
tortured and unstable, but i was surprised when i
saw alice bent over the desk, gripping the edge with
two hands.

"alice?"

she didn't react when i called her name, but her head
was slowly rocking side to side, and i saw her face.
her eyes were blank, dazed my thoughts flew to my
mother. was i already too late?

i hurried to her side, reaching out automatically to
touch her hand.

"alice!" jasper's voice whipped, and then he was right
behind her, his hands curling over hers, loosening
them from their grip on the table. across the room,
the door swung shut with a low click.

"what is it?" he demanded.

she turned her face away from me, into his chest.
"bella," she said.

468 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm right here," i replied.

her head twisted around, her eyes locking on mine,
their expression still strangely blank. i realized at
once that she hadn't been speaking to me, she'd been
answering jasper's question.

"what did you see?" i said - and there was no
question in my flat, uncaring voice.

jasper looked at me sharply. i kept my expression
vacant and waited. his eyes were confused as they
flickered swiftly between alice's face and mine, feeling
the chaos for i could guess what alice had seen
now. i felt a tranquil atmosphere settle around me. i
welcomed it, using it to keep my emotions disciplined,
under control.

alice, too, recovered herself.

"nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice
remarkably calm and convincing. "just the same
room as before."

she finally looked at me, her expression smooth and
withdrawn. "did you want breakfast?"

"no, i'll eat at the airport." i was very calm, too. i went
to the bathroom to shower. almost as if i were
borrowing jasper's strange extra sense, i could feel
alice's wild - though well-concealed - desperation to
have me out of the room, to be alone with jasper. so
she could tell him that they were doing something
wrong, that they were going to fail

i got ready methodically, concentrating on each little
task. i left my hair down, swirling around me,
469 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
covering my face. the peaceful mood jasper created
worked its way through me and helped me think
clearly. helped me plan. i dug through my bag until i
found my sock full of money. i emptied it into my
pocket.

i was anxious to get to the airport, and glad when we
left by seven. i sat alone this time in the back of the
dark car. alice leaned against the door, her face
toward jasper but, behind her sunglasses, shooting
glances in my direction every few seconds.

"alice?" i asked indifferently.

she was wary. "yes?"

"how does it work? the things that you see?" i stared
out the side window, and my voice sounded bored.
"edward said it wasn't definite that things change?"
it was harder than i would have thought to say his
name. that must have been what alerted jasper, why
a fresh wave of serenity filled the car.

"yes, things change" she murmured - hopefully, i
thought. "some things are more certain than others
like the weather. people are harder. i only see the
course they're on while they're on it. once they
change their minds - make a new decision, no
matter how small - the whole future shifts."

i nodded thoughtfully. "so you couldn't see james in
phoenix until he decided to come here."

"yes," she agreed, wary again.

and she hadn't seen me in the mirror room with
james until i'd made the decision to meet him there. i
470 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
tried not to think about what else she might have
seen. i didn't want my panic to make jasper more
suspicious. they would be watching me twice as
carefully now, anyway, after alice's vision. this was
going to be impossible.

we got to the airport. luck was with me, or maybe it
was just good odds. edward's plane was landing in
terminal four, the largest terminal, where most flights
landed - so it wasn't surprising that his was. but it
was the terminal i needed: the biggest, the most
confusing. and there was a door on level three that
might be the only chance.

we parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. i led
the way, for once more knowledgeable about my
surroundings than they were. we took the elevator
down to level three, where the passengers unloaded.
alice and jasper spent a long time looking at the
departing flights board. i could hear them discussing
the pros and cons of new york, atlanta, chicago.
places i'd never seen. and would never see.

i waited for my opportunity, impatient, unable to stop
my toe from tapping. we sat in the long rows of chairs
by the metal detectors, jasper and alice pretending to
people-watch but really watching me. every inch i
shifted in my seat was followed by a quick glance out
of the corner of their eyes. it was hopeless. should i
run? would they dare to stop me physically in this
public place? or would they simply follow?

i pulled the unmarked envelope out of my pocket and
set it on top of alice's black leather bag. she looked at
me.

471 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"my letter," i said. she nodded, tucking it under the
top flap. he would find it soon enough.

the minutes passed and edward's arrival grew closer.
it was amazing how every cell in my body seemed to
know he was coming, to long for his coming. that
made it very hard. i found myself trying to think of
excuses to stay, to see him first and then make my
escape. but i knew that was impossible if i was going
to have any chance to get away. several times alice
offered to go get breakfast with me. later, i told her,
not yet.

i stared at the arrival board, watching as flight after
flight arrived on time. the flight from seattle crept
closer to the top of the board. and then, when i had
only thirty minutes to make my escape, the numbers
changed. his plane was ten minutes early. i had no
more time.

"i think i'll eat now," i said quickly.

alice stood. "i'll come with you."

"do you mind if jasper comes instead?" i asked. "i'm
feeling a little" i didn't finish the sentence. my eyes
were wild enough to convey what i didn't say.

jasper stood up. alice's eyes were confused, but - i
saw to my relief-

not suspicious. she must be attributing the change in
her vision to some maneuver of the tracker's rather
than a betrayal by me.

jasper walked silently beside me, his hand on the
small of my back, as if he were guiding me. i
472 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
pretended a lack of interest in the first few airport
cafes, my head scanning for what i really wanted. and
there it was, around the corner, out of alice's sharp
sight: the level-three ladies' room.

"do you mind?" i asked jasper as we passed. "i'll just
be a moment."

"i'll be right here," he said.

as soon as the door shut behind me, i was running. i
remembered the time i had gotten lost from this
bathroom, because it had two exits. outside the far
door it was only a short sprint to the elevators, and if
jasper stayed where he said he would, i'd never be in
his line of sight. i didn't look behind me as i ran. this
was my only chance, and even if he saw me, i had to
keep going. people stared, but i ignored them. around
the corner the elevators were waiting, and i dashed
forward, throwing my hand between the closing doors
of a full elevator headed down. i squeezed in beside
the irritated passengers, and checked to make sure
that the button for level one had been pushed. it was
already lit, and the doors closed.

as soon as the door opened i was off again, to the
sound of annoyed murmurs behind me. i slowed
myself as i passed the security guards by the luggage
carousels, only to break into a run again as the exit
doors came into view. i had no way of knowing if
jasper was looking for me yet. i would have only
seconds if he was following my scent. i jumped out
the automatic doors, nearly smacking into the glass
when they opened too slowly.

along the crowded curb there wasn't a cab in sight.
473 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i had no time. alice and jasper were either about to
realize i was gone, or they already had. they would
find me in a heartbeat.

a shuttle to the hyatt was just closing its doors a few
feet behind me.

"wait!" i called, running, waving at the driver.

"this is the shuttle to the hyatt," the driver said in
confusion as he opened the doors.

"yes," i huffed, "that's where i'm going." i hurried up
the steps. he looked askance at my luggage-less
state, but then shrugged, not caring enough to ask.

most of the seats were empty. i sat as far from the
other travelers as possible, and watched out the
window as first the sidewalk, and then the airport,
drifted away. i couldn't help imagining edward, where
he would stand at the edge of the road when he found
the end of my trail. i couldn't cry yet, i told myself. i
still had a long way to go. my luck held. in front of the
hyatt, a tired-looking couple was getting their last
suitcase out of the trunk of a cab. i jumped out of the
shuttle and ran to the cab, sliding into the seat
behind the driver. the tired couple and the shuttle
driver stared at me.

i told the surprised cabbie my mother's address. "i
need to get there as soon as possible."

"that's in scottsdale," he complained.

i threw four twenties over the seat.

"will that be enough?"
474 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"sure, kid, no problem."

i sat back against the seat, folding my arms across
my lap. the familiar city began to rush around me,
but i didn't look out the windows. i exerted myself to
maintain control. i was determined not to lose myself
at this point, now that my plan was successfully
completed. there was no point in indulging in more
terror, more anxiety. my path was set. i just had to
follow it now.

so, instead of panicking, i closed my eyes and spent
the twenty minutes'

drive with edward.

i imagined that i had stayed at the airport to meet
edward. i visualized how i would stand on my toes,
the sooner to see his face. how quickly, how
gracefully he would move through the crowds of
people separating us. and then i would run to close
those last few feet between us - reckless as always -
and i would be in his marble arms, finally safe. i
wondered where we would have gone. north
somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. or
maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the
sun together again. i imagined him by the shore, his
skin sparkling like the sea. it wouldn't matter how
long we had to hide. to be trapped in a hotel room
with him would be a kind of heaven. so many
questions i still had for him. i could talk to him
forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side.

i could see his face so clearly now almost hear his
voice. and, despite all the horror and hopelessness, i

475 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
was fleetingly happy. so involved was i in my escapist
daydreams, i lost all track of the seconds racing by.

"hey, what was the number?"

the cabbie's question punctured my fantasy, letting
all the colors run out of my lovely delusions. fear,
bleak and hard, was waiting to fill the empty space
they left behind.

"fifty-eight twenty-one." my voice sounded strangled.
the cabbie looked at me, nervous that i was having
an episode or something.

"here we are, then." he was anxious to get me out of
his car, probably hoping i wouldn't ask for my
change.

"thank you," i whispered. there was no need to be
afraid, i reminded myself. the house was empty. i
had to hurry; my mom was waiting for me, frightened,
depending on me.

i ran to the door, reaching up automatically to grab
the key under the eave. i unlocked the door. it was
dark inside, empty, normal. i ran to the phone,
turning on the kitchen light on my way. there, on the
whiteboard, was a ten-digit number written in a
small, neat hand. my fingers stumbled over the
keypad, making mistakes. i had to hang up and start
again. i concentrated only on the buttons this time,
carefully pressing each one in turn. i was successful.
i held the phone to my ear with a shaking hand. it
rang only once.

476 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"hello, bella," that easy voice answered. "that was
very quick. i'm impressed."

"is my mom all right?"

"she's perfectly fine. don't worry, bella, i have no
quarrel with her. unless you didn't come alone, of
course." light, amused.

"i'm alone." i'd never been more alone in my entire
life.

"very good. now, do you know the ballet studio just
around the corner from your home?"

"yes. i know how to get there."

"well, then, i'll see you very soon."

i hung up.

i ran from the room, through the door, out into the
baking heat. there was no time to look back at my
house, and i didn't want to see it as it was now -
empty, a symbol of fear instead of sanctuary. the last
person to walk through those familiar rooms was my
enemy. from the corner of my eye, i could almost see
my mother standing in the shade of the big
eucalyptus tree where i'd played as a child. or
kneeling by the little plot of dirt around the mailbox,
the cemetery of all the flowers she'd tried to grow. the
memories were better than any reality i would see
today. but i raced away from them, toward the
corner, leaving everything behind me.

i felt so slow, like i was running through wet sand - i
couldn't seem to get enough purchase from the

477 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
concrete. i tripped several times, once falling,
catching myself with my hands, scraping them on the
sidewalk, and then lurching up to plunge forward
again. but at last i made it to the corner. just
another street now; i ran, sweat pouring down my
face, gasping. the sun was hot on my skin, too bright
as it bounced off the white concrete and blinded me. i
felt dangerously exposed. more fiercely than i would
have dreamed i was capable of, i wished for the green,
protective forests of forks of home.

when i rounded the last corner, onto cactus, i could
see the studio, looking just as i remembered it. the
parking lot in front was empty, the vertical blinds in
all the windows drawn. i couldn't run anymore - i
couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the
best of me. i thought of my mother to keep my feet
moving, one in front of the other. as i got closer, i
could see the sign inside the door. it was handwritten
on hot pink paper; it said the dance studio was closed
for spring break. i touched the handle, tugged on it
cautiously. it was unlocked. i fought to catch my
breath, and opened the door.

the lobby was dark and empty, cool, the air
conditioner thrumming. the plastic molded chairs
were stacked along the walls, and the carpet smelled
like shampoo. the west dance floor was dark, i could
see through the open viewing window. the east dance
floor, the bigger room, was lit. but the blinds were
closed on the window.

terror seized me so strongly that i was literally
trapped by it. i couldn't make my feet move forward.

478 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and then my mother's voice called.

"bella? bella?" that same tone of hysterical panic. i
sprinted to the door, to the sound of her voice.

"bella, you scared me! don't you ever do that to me
again!" her voice continued as i ran into the long,
high-ceilinged room.

i stared around me, trying to find where her voice was
coming from. i heard her laugh, and i whirled to the
sound.

there she was, on the tv screen, tousling my hair in
relief. it was thanksgiving, and i was twelve. we'd
gone to see my grandmother in california, the last
year before she died. we went to the beach one day,
and i'd leaned too far over the edge of the pier. she'd
seen my feet flailing, trying to reclaim my balance.
"bella? bella?" she'd called to me in fear.

and then the tv screen was blue.

i turned slowly. he was standing very still by the back
exit, so still i hadn't noticed him at first. in his hand
was a remote control. we stared at each other for a
long moment, and then he smiled.

he walked toward me, quite close, and then passed
me to put the remote down next to the vcr. i turned
carefully to watch him.

"sorry about that, bella, but isn't it better that your
mother didn't really have to be involved in all this?"
his voice was courteous, kind. and suddenly it hit
me. my mother was safe. she was still in florida.
she'd never gotten my message. she'd never been
479 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
terrified by the dark red eyes in the abnormally pale
face before me. she was safe.

"yes," i answered, my voice saturated with relief.

"you don't sound angry that i tricked you."

"i'm not." my sudden high made me brave. what did it
matter now? it would soon be over. charlie and mom
would never be harmed, would never have to fear. i
felt almost giddy. some analytical part of my mind
warned me that i was dangerously close to snapping
from the stress.

"how odd. you really mean it." his dark eyes assessed
me with interest. the irises were nearly black, just a
hint of ruby around the edges. thirsty. "i will give
your strange coven this much, you humans can be
quite interesting. i guess i can see the draw of
observing you. it's amazing - some of you seem to
have no sense of your own self-interest at all."

he was standing a few feet away from me, arms
folded, looking at me curiously. there was no menace
in his face or stance. he was so very average-looking,
nothing remarkable about his face or body at all. just
the white skin, the circled eyes i'd grown so used to.
he wore a pale blue, long-sleeved shirt and faded blue
jeans.

"i suppose you're going to tell me that your boyfriend
will avenge you?" he asked, hopefully it seemed to me.

"no, i don't think so. at least, i asked him not to."

"and what was his reply to that?"

480 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i don't know." it was strangely easy to converse with
this genteel hunter. "i left him a letter."

"how romantic, a last letter. and do you think he will
honor it?" his voice was just a little harder now, a
hint of sarcasm marring his polite tone.

"i hope so."

"hmmm. well, our hopes differ then. you see, this
was all just a little too easy, too quick. to be quite
honest, i'm disappointed. i expected a much greater
challenge. and, after all, i only needed a little luck." i
waited in silence.

"when victoria couldn't get to your father, i had her
find out more about you. there was no sense in
running all over the planet chasing you down when i
could comfortably wait for you in a place of my
choosing. so, after i talked to victoria, i decided to
come to phoenix to pay your mother a visit. i'd heard
you say you were going home. at first, i never
dreamed you meant it. but then i wondered. humans
can be very predictable; they like to be somewhere
familiar, somewhere safe. and wouldn't it be the
perfect ploy, to go to the last place you should be
when you're hiding - the place that you said you'd
be.

"but of course i wasn't sure, it was just a hunch. i
usually get a feeling about the prey that i'm hunting,
a sixth sense, if you will. i listened to your message
when i got to your mother's house, but of course i
couldn't be sure where you'd called from. it was very
useful to have your number, but you could have been

481 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
in antarctica for all i knew, and the game wouldn't
work unless you were close by.

"then your boyfriend got on a plane to phoenix.
victoria was monitoring them for me, naturally; in a
game with this many players, i couldn't be working
alone. and so they told me what i'd hoped, that you
were here after all. i was prepared; i'd already been
through your charming home movies. and then it was
simply a matter of the bluff.

"very easy, you know, not really up to my standards.
so, you see, i'm hoping you're wrong about your
boyfriend. edward, isn't it?" i didn't answer. the
bravado was wearing off. i sensed that he was coming
to the end of his gloat. it wasn't meant for me
anyway. there was no glory in beating me, a weak
human.

"would you mind, very much, if i left a little letter of
my own for your edward?"

he took a step back and touched a palm-sized digital
video camera balanced carefully on top of the stereo.
a small red light indicated that it was already
running. he adjusted it a few times, widened the
frame. i stared at him in horror.

"i'm sorry, but i just don't think he'll be able to resist
hunting me after he watches this. and i wouldn't
want him to miss anything. it was all for him, of
course. you're simply a human, who unfortunately
was in the wrong place, at the wrong time, and
indisputably running with the wrong crowd, i might
add."

482 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he stepped toward me, smiling. "before we begin" i
felt a curl of nausea in the pit of my stomach as he
spoke. this was something i had not anticipated.

"i would just like to rub it in, just a little bit. the
answer was there all along, and i was so afraid
edward would see that and ruin my fun. it happened
once, oh, ages ago. the one and only time my prey
escaped me.

"you see, the vampire who was so stupidly fond of
this little victim made the choice that your edward
was too weak to make. when the old one knew i was
after his little friend, he stole her from the asylum
where he worked

- i never will understand the obsession some
vampires seem to form with you humans - and as
soon as he freed her he made her safe. she didn't
even seem to notice the pain, poor little creature.
she'd been stuck in that black hole of a cell for so
long. a hundred years earlier and she would have
been burned at the stake for her visions. in the
nineteen-twenties it was the asylum and the shock
treatments. when she opened her eyes, strong with
her fresh youth, it was like she'd never seen the sun
before. the old vampire made her a strong new
vampire, and there was no reason for me to touch her
then." he sighed. "i destroyed the old one in
vengeance."

"alice," i breathed, astonished.

"yes, your little friend. i was surprised to see her in
the clearing. so i guess her coven ought to be able to
derive some comfort from this experience. i get you,
483 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
but they get her. the one victim who escaped me,
quite an honor, actually.

"and she did smell so delicious. i still regret that i
never got to taste she smelled even better than you
do. sorry - i don't mean to be offensive. you have a
very nice smell. floral, somehow" he took another
step toward me, till he was just inches away. he lifted
a lock of my hair and sniffed at it delicately. then he
gently patted the strand back into place, and i felt his
cool fingertips against my throat. he reached up to
stroke my cheek once quickly with his thumb, his
face curious. i wanted so badly to run, but i was
frozen. i couldn't even flinch away.

"no," he murmured to himself as he dropped his
hand, "i don't understand." he sighed. "well, i
suppose we should get on with it. and then i can call
your friends and tell them where to find you, and my
little message."

i was definitely sick now. there was pain coming, i
could see it in his eyes. it wouldn't be enough for him
to win, to feed and go. there would be no quick end
like i'd been counting on. my knees began to shake,
and i was afraid i was going to fall.

he stepped back, and began to circle, casually, as if
he were trying to get a better view of a statue in a
museum. his face was still open and friendly as he
decided where to start.

then he slumped forward, into a crouch i recognized,
and his pleasant smile slowly widened, grew, till it
wasn't a smile at all but a contortion of teeth, exposed
and glistening.
484 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i couldn't help myself- i tried to run. as useless as i
knew it would be, as weak as my knees already were,
panic took over and i bolted for the emergency door.

he was in front of me in a flash. i didn't see if he used
his hand or his foot, it was too fast. a crushing blow
struck my chest - i felt myself flying backward, and
then heard the crunch as my head bashed into the
mirrors. the glass buckled, some of the pieces
shattering and splintering on the floor beside me.

i was too stunned to feel the pain. i couldn't breathe
yet. he walked toward me slowly.

"that's a very nice effect," he said, examining the
mess of glass, his voice friendly again. "i thought this
room would be visually dramatic for my little film.
that's why i picked this place to meet you. it's
perfect, isn't it?"

i ignored him, scrambling on my hands and knees,
crawling toward the other door.

he was over me at once, his foot stepping down hard
on my leg. i heard the sickening snap before i felt it.
but then i did feel it, and i couldn't hold back my
scream of agony. i twisted up to reach for my leg, and
he was standing over me, smiling.

"would you like to rethink your last request?" he
asked pleasantly. his toe nudged my broken leg and i
heard a piercing scream. with a shock, i realized it
was mine.

"wouldn't you rather have edward try to find me?" he
prompted.

485 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no!" i croaked. "no, edward, don't-" and then
something smashed into my face, throwing me back
into the broken mirrors.

over the pain of my leg, i felt the sharp rip across my
scalp where the glass cut into it. and then the warm
wetness began to spread through my hair with
alarming speed. i could feel it soaking the shoulder of
my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. the
smell of it twisted my stomach.

through the nausea and dizziness i saw something
that gave me a sudden, final shred of hope. his eyes,
merely intent before, now burned with an
uncontrollable need. the blood - spreading crimson
across my white shirt, pooling rapidly on the floor -
was driving him mad with thirst. no matter his
original intentions, he couldn't draw this out much
longer. let it be quick now, was all i could hope as
the flow of blood from my head sucked my
consciousness away with it. my eyes were closing. i
heard, as if from underwater, the final growl of the
hunter. i could see, through the long tunnels my eyes
had become, his dark shape coming toward me. with
my last effort, my hand instinctively raised to protect
my face. my eyes closed, and i drifted.

486 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 the angel

as i drifted, i dreamed.

where i floated, under the dark water, i heard the
happiest sound my mind could conjure up - as
beautiful, as uplifting, as it was ghastly. it was
another snarl; a deeper, wilder roar that rang with
fury. i was brought back, almost to the surface, by a
sharp pain slashing my upraised hand, but i couldn't
find my way back far enough to open my eyes. and
then i knew i was dead.

because, through the heavy water, i heard the sound
of an angel calling my name, calling me to the only
heaven i wanted.

"oh no, bella, no!" the angel's voice cried in horror.
behind that longed-for sound was another noise - an
awful tumult that my mind shied away from. a
vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound,
and a high keening, suddenly breaking off

i tried to concentrate on the angel's voice instead.

"bella, please! bella, listen to me, please, please,
bella, please!" he begged.

yes, i wanted to say. anything. but i couldn't find my
lips.

"carlisle!" the angel called, agony in his perfect voice.
"bella, bella, no, oh please, no, no!" and the angel
was sobbing tearless, broken sobs. the angel
487 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
shouldn't weep, it was wrong. i tried to find him, to
tell him everything was fine, but the water was so
deep, it was pressing on me, and i couldn't breathe.

there was a point of pressure against my head. it
hurt. then, as that pain broke through the darkness
to me, other pains came, stronger pains. i cried out,
gasping, breaking through the dark pool.

"bella!" the angel cried.

"she's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't
deep," a calm voice informed me. "watch out for her
leg, it's broken." a howl of rage strangled on the
angel's lips.

i felt a sharp stab in my side. this couldn't be heaven,
could it? there was too much pain for that.

"some ribs, too, i think," the methodical voice
continued. but the sharp pains were fading. there
was a new pain, a scalding pain in my hand that was
overshadowing everything else.

someone was burning me.

"edward." i tried to tell him, but my voice was so
heavy and slow. i couldn't understand myself.

"bella, you're going to be fine. can you hear me,
bella? i love you."

"edward," i tried again. my voice was a little clearer.

"yes, i'm here."

"it hurts," i whimpered.

488 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i know, bella, i know" - and then, away from me,
anguished - "can't you do anything?"

"my bag, please hold your breath, alice, it will
help," carlisle promised.

"alice?" i groaned.

"she's here, she knew where to find you."

"my hand hurts," i tried to tell him.

"i know, bella. carlisle will give you something, it will
stop."

"my hand is burning!" i screamed, finally breaking
through the last of the darkness, my eyes fluttering
open. i couldn't see his face, something dark and
warm was clouding my eyes. why couldn't they see
the fire and put it out?

his voice was frightened. "bella?"

"the fire! someone stop the fire!" i screamed as it
burned me.

"carlisle! her hand!"

"he bit her." carlisle's voice was no longer calm, it
was appalled. i heard edward catch his breath in
horror.

"edward, you have to do it." it was alice's voice, close
by my head. cool fingers brushed at the wetness in
my eyes.

"no!" he bellowed.

"alice," i moaned.
489 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"there may be a chance," carlisle said.

"what?" edward begged.

"see if you can suck the venom back out. the wound
is fairly clean." as carlisle spoke, i could feel more
pressure on my head, something poking and pulling
at my scalp. the pain of it was lost in the pain of the
fire.

"will that work?" alice's voice was strained.

"i don't know," carlisle said. "but we have to hurry."

"carlisle, i" edward hesitated. "i don't know if i can
do that." there was agony in his beautiful voice again.

"it's your decision, edward, either way. i can't help
you. i have to get this bleeding stopped here if you're
going to be taking blood from her hand."

i writhed in the grip of the fiery torture, the movement
making the pain in my leg flare sickeningly.

"edward!" i screamed. i realized my eyes were closed
again. i opened them, desperate to find his face. and i
found him. finally, i could see his perfect face,
staring at me, twisted into a mask of indecision and
pain.

"alice, get me something to brace her leg!" carlisle
was bent over me, working on my head. "edward, you
must do it now, or it will be too late." edward's face
was drawn. i watched his eyes as the doubt was
suddenly replaced with a blazing determination. his
jaw tightened. i felt his cool, strong fingers on my
burning hand, locking it in place. then his head bent
490 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
over it, and his cold lips pressed against my skin. at
first the pain was worse. i screamed and thrashed
against the cool hands that held me back. i heard
alice's voice, trying to calm me. something heavy held
my leg to the floor, and carlisle had my head locked
in the vise of his stone arms.

then, slowly, my writhing calmed as my hand grew
more and more numb. the fire was dulling, focusing
into an ever-smaller point.

i felt my consciousness slipping as the pain subsided.
i was afraid to fall into the black waters again, afraid i
would lose him in the darkness.

"edward," i tried to say, but i couldn't hear my voice.
they could hear me.

"he's right here, bella."

"stay, edward, stay with me"

"i will." his voice was strained, but somehow
triumphant. i sighed contentedly. the fire was gone,
the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping
through my body.

"is it all out?" carlisle asked from somewhere far
away.

"her blood tastes clean," edward said quietly. "i can
taste the morphine."

"bella?" carlisle called to me.

i tried to answer. "mmmmm?"

"is the fire gone?"
491 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yes," i sighed. "thank you, edward."

"i love you," he answered.

"i know," i breathed, so tired.

i heard my favorite sound in the world: edward's
quiet laugh, weak with relief.

"bella?" carlisle asked again.

i frowned; i wanted to sleep. "what?"

"where is your mother?"

"in florida," i sighed. "he tricked me, edward. he
watched our videos." the outrage in my voice was
pitifully frail.

but that reminded me.

"alice." i tried to open my eyes. "alice, the video - he
knew you, alice, he knew where you came from." i
meant to speak urgently, but my voice was feeble. "i
smell gasoline," i added, surprised through the haze
in my brain.

"it's time to move her," carlisle said.

"no, i want to sleep," i complained.

"you can sleep, sweetheart, i'll carry you," edward
soothed me. and i was in his arms, cradled against
his chest - floating, all the pain gone.

"sleep now, bella" were the last words i heard.

492 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 an impasse

my eyes opened to a bright, white light. i was in an
unfamiliar room, a white room. the wall beside me
was covered in long vertical blinds; over my head, the
glaring lights blinded me. i was propped up on a
hard, uneven bed - a bed with rails. the pillows were
flat and lumpy. there was an annoying beeping
sound somewhere close by. i hoped that meant i was
still alive. death shouldn't be this uncomfortable.

my hands were all twisted up with clear tubes, and
something was taped across my face, under my nose.
i lifted my hand to rip it off.

"no, you don't." and cool fingers caught my hand.

"edward?" i turned my head slightly, and his
exquisite face was just inches from mine, his chin
resting on the edge of my pillow. i realized again that i
was alive, this time with gratitude and elation. "oh,
edward, i'm so sorry!"

"shhhh," he shushed me. "everything's all right now."

"what happened?" i couldn't remember clearly, and
my mind rebelled against me as i tried to recall.

"i was almost too late. i could have been too late," he
whispered, his voice tormented.

"i was so stupid, edward. i thought he had my mom."

"he tricked us all."

493 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i need to call charlie and my mom," i realized
through the haze.

"alice called them. rene is here - well, here in the
hospital. she's getting something to eat right now."

"she's here?" i tried to sit up, but the spinning in my
head accelerated, and his hand pushed me gently
down onto the pillows.

"she'll be back soon," he promised. "and you need to
stay still."

"but what did you tell her?" i panicked. i had no
interest in being soothed. my mom was here and i
was recovering from a vampire attack. "why did you
tell her i'm here?"

"you fell down two flights of stairs and through a
window." he paused.

"you have to admit, it could happen."

i sighed, and it hurt. i stared down at my body under
the sheet, the huge lump that was my leg.

"how bad am i?" i asked.

"you have a broken leg, four broken ribs, some cracks
in your skull, bruises covering every inch of your
skin, and you've lost a lot of blood. they gave you a
few transfusions. i didn't like it - it made you smell
all wrong for a while."

"that must have been a nice change for you."

"no, i like how you smell."

494 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"how did you do it?" i asked quietly. he knew what i
meant at once.

"i'm not sure." he looked away from my wondering
eyes, lifting my gauze-wrapped hand from the bed
and holding it gently in his, careful not to disrupt the
wire connecting me to one of the monitors. i waited
patiently for the rest.

he sighed without returning my gaze. "it was
impossible to stop," he whispered. "impossible. but
i did." he looked up finally, with half a smile. "i must
love you."

"don't i taste as good as i smell?" i smiled in
response. that hurt my face.

"even better - better than i'd imagined."

"i'm sorry," i apologized.

he raised his eyes to the ceiling. "of all the things to
apologize for."

"what should i apologize for?"

"for very nearly taking yourself away from me
forever."

"i'm sorry," i apologized again.

"i know why you did it." his voice was comforting. "it
was still irrational, of course. you should have waited
for me, you should have told me."

"you wouldn't have let me go."

495 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"no," he agreed in a grim tone, "i wouldn't." some very
unpleasant memories were beginning to come back to
me. i shuddered, and then winced.

he was instantly anxious. "bella, what's wrong?"

"what happened to james?"

"after i pulled him off you, emmett and jasper took
care of him." there was a fierce note of regret in his
voice.

this confused me. "i didn't see emmett and jasper
there."

"they had to leave the room there was a lot of
blood."

"but you stayed."

"yes, i stayed."

"and alice, and carlisle" i said in wonder.

"they love you, too, you know."

a flash of painful images from the last time i'd seen
alice reminded me of something. "did alice see the
tape?" i asked anxiously.

"yes." a new sound darkened his voice, a tone of
sheer hatred.

"she was always in the dark, that's why she didn't
remember."

"i know. she understands now." his voice was even,
but his face was black with fury.

496 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i tried to reach his face with my free hand, but
something stopped me. i glanced down to see the iv
pulling at my hand.

"ugh." i winced.

"what is it?" he asked anxiously - distracted, but not
enough. the bleakness did not entirely leave his eyes.

"needles," i explained, looking away from the one in
my hand. i concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and
tried to breathe deeply despite the ache in my ribs.

"afraid of a needle," he muttered to himself under his
breath, shaking his head. "oh, a sadistic vampire,
intent on torturing her to death, sure, no problem,
she runs off to meet him. an iv, on the other hand"
i rolled my eyes. i was pleased to discover that this
reaction, at least, was pain-free. i decided to change
the subject.

"why are you here?" i asked.

he stared at me, first confusion and then hurt
touching his eyes. his brows pulled together as he
frowned. "do you want me to leave?"

"no!" i protested, horrified by the thought. "no, i
meant, why does my mother think you're here? i need
to have my story straight before she gets back."

"oh," he said, and his forehead smoothed back into
marble. "i came to phoenix to talk some sense into
you, to convince you to come back to forks." his wide
eyes were so earnest and sincere, i almost believed
him myself. "you agreed to see me, and you drove out
to the hotel where i was staying with carlisle and
497 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
alice - of course i was here with parental
supervision," he inserted virtuously, "but you tripped
on the stairs on the way to my room and well, you
know the rest. you don't need to remember any
details, though; you have a good excuse to be a little
muddled about the finer points."

i thought about it for a moment. "there are a few
flaws with that story. like no broken windows."

"not really," he said. "alice had a little bit too much
fun fabricating evidence. it's all been taken care of
very convincingly - you could probably sue the hotel
if you wanted to. you have nothing to worry about,"
he promised, stroking my cheek with the lightest of
touches.

"your only job now is to heal."

i wasn't so lost to the soreness or the fog of
medication that i didn't respond to his touch. the
beeping of the monitor jumped around erratically -
now he wasn't the only one who could hear my heart
misbehave.

"that's going to be embarrassing," i muttered to
myself. he chuckled, and a speculative look came into
his eye. "hmm, i wonder" he leaned in slowly; the
beeping noise accelerated wildly before his lips even
touched me. but when they did, though with the most
gentle of pressure, the beeping stopped altogether.

he pulled back abruptly, his anxious expression
turning to relief as the monitor reported the restarting
of my heart.

498 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"it seems that i'm going to have to be even more
careful with you than usual." he frowned.

"i was not finished kissing you," i complained. "don't
make me come over there."

he grinned, and bent to press his lips lightly to mine.
the monitor went wild.

but then his lips were taut. he pulled away.

"i think i hear your mother," he said, grinning again.

"don't leave me," i cried, an irrational surge of panic
flooding through me. i couldn't let him go - he might
disappear from me again. he read the terror in my
eyes for a short second. "i won't," he promised
solemnly, and then he smiled. "i'll take a nap." he
moved from the hard plastic chair by my side to the
turquoise faux-leather recliner at the foot of my bed,
leaning it all the way back, and closing his eyes. he
was perfectly still.

"don't forget to breathe," i whispered sarcastically. he
took a deep breath, his eyes still closed.

i could hear my mother now. she was talking to
someone, maybe a nurse, and she sounded tired and
upset. i wanted to jump out of the bed and run to
her, to calm her, promise that everything was fine.
but i wasn't in any sort of shape for jumping, so i
waited impatiently.

the door opened a crack, and she peeked through.

499 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"mom!" i whispered, my voice full of love and relief.
she took in edward's still form on the recliner, and
tiptoed to my bedside.

"he never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself.

"mom, i'm so glad to see you!"

she bent down to hug me gently, and i felt warm
tears falling on my cheeks.

"bella, i was so upset!"

"i'm sorry, mom. but everything's fine now, it's okay,"
i comforted her.

"i'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." she sat
on the edge of my bed.

i suddenly realized i didn't have any idea when it was.
"how long have they been closed?"

"it's friday, hon, you've been out for a while."

"friday?" i was shocked. i tried to remember what day
it had been when

but i didn't want to think about that.

"they had to keep you sedated for a while, honey -
you've got a lot of injuries."

"i know." i could feel them.

"you're lucky dr. cullen was there. he's such a nice
man very young, though. and he looks more like a
model than a doctor"

"you met carlisle?"
500 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"and edward's sister alice. she's a lovely girl."

"she is," i agreed wholeheartedly.

she glanced over her shoulder at edward, lying with
his eyes closed in the chair. "you didn't tell me you
had such good friends in forks." i cringed, and then
moaned.

"what hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back
to me. edward's eyes flashed to my face.

"it's fine," i assured them. "i just have to remember
not to move." he lapsed back into his phony slumber.

i took advantage of my mother's momentary
distraction to keep the subject from returning to my
less-than-candid behavior. "where's phil?" i asked
quickly.

"florida - oh, bella! you'll never guess! just when we
were about to leave, the best news!"

"phil got signed?" i guessed.

"yes! how did you guess! the suns, can you believe
it?"

"that's great, mom," i said as enthusiastically as i
could manage, though i had little idea what that
meant.

"and you'll like jacksonville so much," she gushed
while i stared at her vacantly. "i was a little bit
worried when phil started talking about akron, what
with the snow and everything, because you know how
i hate the cold, but now jacksonville! it's always

501 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. we
found the cutest house, yellow, with white trim, and a
porch just like in an old movie, and this huge oak
tree, and it's just a few minutes from the ocean, and
you'll have your own bathroom -"

"wait, mom!" i interrupted. edward still had his eyes
closed, but he looked too tense to pass as asleep.
"what are you talking about? i'm not going to florida.
i live in forks."

"but you don't have to anymore, silly," she laughed.
"phil will be able to be around so much more now
we've talked about it a lot, and what i'm going to do is
trade off on the away games, half the time with you,
half the time with him."

"mom." i hesitated, wondering how best to be
diplomatic about this. "i want to live in forks. i'm
already settled in at school, and i have a couple of
girlfriends" - she glanced toward edward again when
i reminded her of friends, so i tried another direction
- "and charlie needs me. he's just all alone up there,
and he can't cook at all."

"you want to stay in forks?" she asked, bewildered.
the idea was inconceivable to her. and then her eyes
flickered back toward edward.

"why?"

"i told you - school, charlie - ouch!" i'd shrugged.
not a good idea. her hands fluttered helplessly over
me, trying to find a safe place to pat. she made do
with my forehead; it was unbandaged.

502 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"bella, honey, you hate forks," she reminded me.

"it's not so bad."

she frowned and looked back and forth between
edward and me, this time very deliberately.

"is it this boy?" she whispered.

i opened my mouth to lie, but her eyes were
scrutinizing my face, and i knew she would see
through that.

"he's part of it," i admitted. no need to confess how
big a part. "so, have you had a chance to talk with
edward?" i asked.

"yes." she hesitated, looking at his perfectly still form.
"and i want to talk to you about that."

uh-oh. "what about?" i asked.

"i think that boy is in love with you," she accused,
keeping her voice low.

"i think so, too," i confided.

"and how do you feel about him?" she only poorly
concealed the raging curiosity in her voice.

i sighed, looking away. as much as i loved my mom,
this was not a conversation i wanted to have with her.
"i'm pretty crazy about him." there - that sounded
like something a teenager with her first boyfriend
might say.

"well, he seems very nice, and, my goodness, he's
incredibly good-looking, but you're so young, bella"

503 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
her voice was unsure; as far as i could remember,
this was the first time since i was eight that she'd
come close to trying to sound like a parental
authority. i recognized the reasonable-but-firm tone
of voice from talks i'd had with her about men.

"i know that, mom. don't worry about it. it's just a
crush," i soothed her.

"that's right," she agreed, easily pleased.

then she sighed and glanced guiltily over her
shoulder at the big, round clock on the wall.

"do you need to go?"

she bit her lip. "phil's supposed to call in a little
while i didn't know you were going to wake up"

"no problem, mom." i tried to tone down the relief so
she wouldn't get her feelings hurt. "i won't be alone."

"i'll be back soon. i've been sleeping here, you know,"
she announced, proud of herself.

"oh, mom, you don't have to do that! you can sleep at
home - i'll never notice." the swirl of painkillers in
my brain was making it hard to concentrate even
now, though, apparently, i'd been sleeping for days.

"i was too nervous," she admitted sheepishly. "there's
been some crime in the neighborhood, and i don't like
being there alone."

"crime?" i asked in alarm.

"someone broke into that dance studio around the
corner from the house and burned it to the ground -
504 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
there's nothing left at all! and they left a stolen car
right out front. do you remember when you used to
dance there, honey?"

"i remember." i shivered, and winced.

"i can stay, baby, if you need me."

"no, mom, i'll be fine. edward will be with me." she
looked like that might be why she wanted to stay. "i'll
be back tonight." it sounded as much like a warning
as it sounded like a promise, and she glanced at
edward again as she said it.

"i love you, mom."

"i love you, too, bella. try to be more careful when
you walk, honey, i don't want to lose you."

edward's eyes stayed closed, but a wide grin flashed
across his face. a nurse came bustling in then to
check all my tubes and wires. my mother kissed my
forehead, patted my gauze-wrapped hand, and left.
the nurse was checking the paper readout on my
heart monitor.

"are you feeling anxious, honey? your heart rate got a
little high there."

"i'm fine," i assured her.

"i'll tell your rn that you're awake. she'll be in to see
you in a minute."

as soon as she closed the door, edward was at my
side.

"you stole a car?" i raised my eyebrows.
505 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he smiled, unrepentant. "it was a good car, very fast."

"how was your nap?" i asked.

"interesting." his eyes narrowed.

"what?"

he looked down while he answered. "i'm surprised. i
thought florida and your mother well, i thought
that's what you would want." i stared at him
uncomprehendingly. "but you'd be stuck inside all
day in florida. you'd only be able to come out at
night, just like a real vampire."

he almost smiled, but not quite. and then his face
was grave. "i would stay in forks, bella. or
somewhere like it," he explained. "someplace where i
couldn't hurt you anymore."

it didn't sink in at first. i continued to stare at him
blankly as the words one by one clicked into place in
my head like a ghastly puzzle. i was barely conscious
of the sound of my heart accelerating, though, as my
breathing became hyperventilation, i was aware of the
sharp aching in my protesting ribs.

he didn't say anything; he watched my face warily as
the pain that had nothing to do with broken bones,
pain that was infinitely worse, threatened to crush
me.

and then another nurse walked purposefully into the
room. edward sat still as stone as she took in my
expression with a practiced eye before turning to the
monitors.

506 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"time for more pain meds, sweetheart?" she asked
kindly, tapping the iv

feed.

"no, no," i mumbled, trying to keep the agony out of
my voice. "i don't need anything." i couldn't afford to
close my eyes now.

"no need to be brave, honey. it's better if you don't get
too stressed out; you need to rest." she waited, but i
just shook my head.

"okay," she sighed. "hit the call button when you're
ready." she gave edward a stern look, and threw one
more anxious glance at the machinery, before leaving.

his cool hands were on my face; i stared at him with
wild eyes.

"shhh, bella, calm down."

"don't leave me," i begged in a broken voice.

"i won't," he promised. "now relax before i call the
nurse back to sedate you."

but my heart couldn't slow.

"bella." he stroked my face anxiously. "i'm not going
anywhere. i'll be right here as long as you need me."

"do you swear you won't leave me?" i whispered. i
tried to control the gasping, at least. my ribs were
throbbing.

he put his hands on either side of my face and
brought his face close to mine. his eyes were wide

507 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
and serious. "i swear." the smell of his breath was
soothing. it seemed to ease the ache of my breathing.
he continued to hold my gaze while my body slowly
relaxed and the beeping returned to a normal pace.
his eyes were dark, closer to black than gold today.

"better?" he asked.

"yes," i said cautiously.

he shook his head and muttered something
unintelligible. i thought i picked out the word
"overreaction."

"why did you say that?" i whispered, trying to keep
my voice from shaking. "are you tired of having to
save me all the time? do you want me to go away?"

"no, i don't want to be without you, bella, of course
not. be rational. and i have no problem with saving
you, either - if it weren't for the fact that i was the
one putting you in danger that i'm the reason that
you're here."

"yes, you are the reason." i frowned. "the reason i'm
here - alive."

"barely." his voice was just a whisper. "covered in
gauze and plaster and hardly able to move."

"i wasn't referring to my most recent near-death
experience," i said, growing irritated. "i was thinking
of the others - you can take your pick. if it weren't
for you, i would be rotting away in the forks
cemetery."

508 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he winced at my words, but the haunted look didn't
leave his eyes.

"that's not the worst part, though," he continued to
whisper. he acted as if i hadn't spoken. "not seeing
you there on the floor crumpled and broken." his
voice was choked. "not thinking i was too late. not
even hearing you scream in pain - all those
unbearable memories that i'll carry with me for the
rest of eternity. no, the very worst was feeling

knowing that i couldn't stop. believing that i was
going to kill you myself."

"but you didn't."

"i could have. so easily."

i knew i needed to stay calm but he was trying to
talk himself into leaving me, and the panic fluttered
in my lungs, trying to get out.

"promise me," i whispered.

"what?"

"you know what." i was starting to get angry now. he
was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the
negative.

he heard the change in my tone. his eyes tightened.
"i don't seem to be strong enough to stay away from
you, so i suppose that you'll get your way whether it
kills you or not," he added roughly.

"good." he hadn't promised, though - a fact that i
had not missed. the panic was only barely contained;

509 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
i had no strength left to control the anger. "you told
me how you stopped now i want to know why," i
demanded.

"why?" he repeated warily.

"why you did it. why didn't you just let the venom
spread? by now i would be just like you."

edward's eyes seemed to turn flat black, and i
remembered that this was something he'd never
intended me to know. alice must have been
preoccupied by the things she'd learned about
herself or she'd been very careful with her thoughts
around him - clearly, he'd had no idea that she'd
filled me in on the mechanics of vampire conversions.
he was surprised, and infuriated. his nostrils flared,
his mouth looked as if it was chiseled from stone.

he wasn't going to answer, that much was clear.

"i'll be the first to admit that i have no experience
with relationships," i said. "but it just seems logical
a man and woman have to be somewhat equal as
in, one of them can't always be swooping in and
saving the other one. they have to save each other
equally." he folded his arms on the side of my bed
and rested his chin on his arms. his expression was
smooth, the anger reined in. evidently he'd decided
he wasn't angry with me. i hoped i'd get a chance to
warn alice before he caught up with her.

"you have saved me," he said quietly.

"i can't always be lois lane," i insisted. "i want to be
superman, too."

510 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you don't know what you're asking." his voice was
soft; he stared intently at the edge of the pillowcase.

"i think i do."

"bella, you don't know. i've had almost ninety years to
think about this, and i'm still not sure."

"do you wish that carlisle hadn't saved you?"

"no, i don't wish that." he paused before continuing.
"but my life was over. i wasn't giving anything up."

"you are my life. you're the only thing it would hurt
me to lose." i was getting better at this. it was easy to
admit how much i needed him. he was very calm,
though. decided.

"i can't do it, bella. i won't do that to you."

"why not?" my throat rasped and the words weren't
as loud as i'd meant them to be. "don't tell me it's too
hard! after today, or i guess it was a few days ago
anyway, after that, it should be nothing." he glared at
me.

"and the pain?" he asked.

i blanched. i couldn't help it. but i tried to keep my
expression from showing how clearly i remembered
the feeling the fire in my veins.

"that's my problem," i said. "i can handle it."

"it's possible to take bravery to the point where it
becomes insanity."

"it's not an issue. three days. big deal."

511 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
edward grimaced again as my words reminded him
that i was more informed than he had ever intended
me to be. i watched him repress the anger, watched
as his eyes grew speculative.

"charlie?" he asked curtly. "rene?"

minutes passed in silence as i struggled to answer his
question. i opened my mouth, but no sound came
out. i closed it again. he waited, and his expression
became triumphant because he knew i had no true
answer.

"look, that's not an issue either," i finally muttered;
my voice was as unconvincing as it always was when
i lied. "rene has always made the choices that work
for her - she'd want me to do the same. and
charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. i
can't take care of them forever. i have my own life to
live."

"exactly," he snapped. "and i won't end it for you."

"if you're waiting for me to be on my deathbed, i've got
news for you! i was just there!"

"you're going to recover," he reminded me.

i took a deep breath to calm myself, ignoring the
spasm of pain it triggered. i stared at him, and he
stared back. there was no compromise in his face.

"no," i said slowly. "i'm not."

his forehead creased. "of course you are. you may
have a scar or two"

512 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you're wrong," i insisted. "i'm going to die."

"really, bella." he was anxious now. "you'll be out of
here in a few days. two week at most."

i glared at him. "i may not die now but i'm going to
die sometime. every minute of the day, i get closer.
and i'm going to get old." he frowned as what i was
saying sunk in, pressing his long fingers to his
temples and closing his eyes. "that's how it's
supposed to happen. how it should happen. how it
would have happened if i didn't exist - and i
shouldn't exist."

i snorted. he opened his eyes in surprise. "that's
stupid. that's like going to someone who's just won
the lottery, taking their money, and saying, 'look,
let's just go back to how things should be. it's better
that way.' and i'm not buying it."

"i'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled.

"that's right. you're much better."

he rolled his eyes and set his lips. "bella, we're not
having this discussion anymore. i refuse to damn you
to an eternity of night and that's the end of it."

"if you think that's the end, then you don't know me
very well," i warned him. "you're not the only vampire
i know."

his eyes went black again. "alice wouldn't dare." and
for a moment he looked so frightening that i couldn't
help but believe it - i couldn't imagine someone
brave enough to cross him.

513 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"alice already saw it, didn't she?" i guessed. "that's
why the things she says upset you. she knows i'm
going to be like you someday."

"she's wrong. she also saw you dead, but that didn't
happen, either."

"you'll never catch me betting against alice."

we stared at each other for a very long time. it was
quiet except for the whirring of the machines, the
beeping, the dripping, the ticking of the big clock on
the wall. finally, his expression softened.

"so where does that leave us?" i wondered.

he chuckled humorlessly. "i believe it's called an
impasse." i sighed. "ouch," i muttered.

"how are you feeling?" he asked, eyeing the button for
the nurse.

"i'm fine," i lied.

"i don't believe you," he said gently.

"i'm not going back to sleep."

"you need rest. all this arguing isn't good for you."

"so give in," i hinted.

"nice try." he reached for the button.

"no!"

he ignored me.

"yes?" the speaker on the wall squawked.

514 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i think we're ready for more pain medication," he
said calmly, ignoring my furious expression.

"i'll send in the nurse." the voice sounded very bored.

"i won't take it," i promised.

he looked toward the sack of fluids hanging beside
my bed. "i don't think they're going to ask you to
swallow anything."

my heart rate started to climb. he read the fear in my
eyes, and sighed in frustration.

"bella, you're in pain. you need to relax so you can
heal. why are you being so difficult? they're not going
to put any more needles in you now."

"i'm not afraid of the needles," i mumbled. "i'm afraid
to close my eyes." then he smiled his crooked smile,
and took my face between his hands. "i told you i'm
not going anywhere. don't be afraid. as long as it
makes you happy, i'll be here."

i smiled back, ignoring the ache in my cheeks. "you're
talking about forever, you know."

"oh, you'll get over it - it's just a crush."

i shook my head in disbelief- it made me dizzy. "i
was shocked when rene swallowed that one. i know
you know better."

"that's the beautiful thing about being human," he
told me. "things change."

my eyes narrowed. "don't hold your breath."

515 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
he was laughing when the nurse came in,
brandishing a syringe.

"excuse me," she said brusquely to edward.

he got up and crossed to the end of the small room,
leaning against the wall. he folded his arms and
waited. i kept my eyes on him, still apprehensive. he
met my gaze calmly.

"here you go, honey." the nurse smiled as she
injected the medicine into my tube. "you'll feel better
now."

"thanks," i mumbled, unenthusiastic. it didn't take
long. i could feel the drowsiness trickling through my
bloodstream almost immediately.

"that ought to do it," she muttered as my eyelids
drooped. she must have left the room, because
something cold and smooth touched my face.

"stay." the word was slurred.

"i will," he promised. his voice was beautiful, like a
lullaby. "like i said, as long as it makes you happy
as long as it's what's best for you." i tried to shake my
head, but it was too heavy. "'s not the same thing," i
mumbled.

he laughed. "don't worry about that now, bella. you
can argue with me when you wake up."

i think i smiled. '"kay."

i could feel his lips at my ear.

"i love you," he whispered.
516 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"me, too."

"i know," he laughed quietly.

i turned my head slightly searching. he knew what
i was after. his lips touched mine gently.

"thanks," i sighed.

"anytime."

i wasn't really there at all anymore. but i fought
against the stupor weakly. there was just one more
thing i wanted to tell him.

"edward?" i struggled to pronounce his name clearly.

"yes?"

"i'm betting on alice," i mumbled.

and then the night closed over me.

517 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
 an occasion

edward helped me into his car, being very careful of
the wisps of silk and chiffon, the flowers he'd just
pinned into my elaborately styled curls, and my bulky
walking cast. he ignored the angry set of my mouth.
when he had me settled, he got in the driver's seat
and headed back out the long, narrow drive.

"at what point exactly are you going to tell me what's
going on?" i asked grumpily. i really hated surprises.
and he knew that.

"i'm shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." he
threw a mocking smile in my direction, and my breath
caught in my throat. would i ever get used to his
perfection?

"i did mention that you looked very nice, didn't i?" i
verified.

"yes." he grinned again. i'd never seen him dress in
black before, and, with the contrast against his pale
skin, his beauty was absolutely surreal. that much i
couldn't deny, even if the fact that he was wearing a
tuxedo made me very nervous.

not quite as nervous as the dress. or the shoe. only
one shoe, as my other foot was still securely encased
in plaster. but the stiletto heel, held on only by satin
ribbons, certainly wasn't going to help me as i tried to
hobble around.

518 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"i'm not coming over anymore if alice is going to treat
me like guinea pig barbie when i do," i griped. i'd
spent the better part of the day in alice's staggeringly
vast bathroom, a helpless victim as she played
hairdresser and cosmetician. whenever i fidgeted or
complained, she reminded me that she didn't have
any memories of being human, and asked me not to
ruin her vicarious fun. then she'd dressed me in the
most ridiculous dress - deep blue, frilly and off the
shoulders, with french tags i couldn't read - a dress
more suitable for a runway than forks. nothing good
could come of our formal attire, of that i was sure.
unless

but i was afraid to put my suspicions into words,
even in my own head. i was distracted then by the
sound of a phone ringing. edward pulled his cell
phone from a pocket inside his jacket, looking briefly
at the caller id before answering.

"hello, charlie," he said warily.

"charlie?" i frowned.

charlie had been difficult since my return to forks.
he had compartmentalized my bad experience into
two defined reactions. toward carlisle he was almost
worshipfully grateful. on the other hand, he was
stubbornly convinced that edward was at fault -
because, if not for him, i wouldn't have left home in
the first place. and edward was far from disagreeing
with him. these days i had rules that hadn't existed
before: curfews visiting hours.

519 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
something charlie was saying made edward's eyes
widen in disbelief, and then a grin spread across his
face.

"you're kidding!" he laughed.

"what is it?" i demanded.

he ignored me. "why don't you let me talk to him?"
edward suggested with evident pleasure. he waited
for a few seconds.

"hello, tyler, this is edward cullen." his voice was
very friendly, on the surface. i knew it well enough to
catch the soft edge of menace. what was tyler doing
at my house? the awful truth began to dawn on me. i
looked again at the inappropriate dress alice had
forced me into.

"i'm sorry if there's been some kind of
miscommunication, but bella is unavailable tonight."
edward's tone changed, and the threat in his voice
was suddenly much more evident as he continued.
"to be perfectly honest, she'll be unavailable every
night, as far as anyone besides myself is concerned.
no offense. and i'm sorry about your evening." he
didn't sound sorry at all. and then he snapped the
phone shut, a huge smirk on his face.

my face and neck flushed crimson with anger. i could
feel the rage-induced tears starting to fill my eyes.

he looked at me in surprise. "was that last part a bit
too much? i didn't mean to offend you."

i ignored that.

520 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you're taking me to the prom!" i yelled.

it was embarrassingly obvious now. if i'd been paying
any attention at all, i'm sure i would have noticed the
date on the posters that decorated the school
buildings. but i'd never dreamed he was thinking of
subjecting me to this. didn't he know me at all?

he wasn't expecting the force of my reaction, that was
clear. he pressed his lips together and his eyes
narrowed. "don't be difficult, bella." my eyes flashed
to the window; we were halfway to the school already.

"why are you doing this to me?" i demanded in
horror. he gestured to his tuxedo. "honestly, bella,
what did you think we were doing?"

i was mortified. first, because i'd missed the obvious.
and also because the vague suspicions -
expectations, really - that i'd been forming all day,
as alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen,
were so far wide of the mark. my half-fearful hopes
seemed very silly now. i'd guessed there was some
kind of occasion brewing. but prom! that was the
furthest thing from my mind.

the angry tears rolled over my cheeks. i remembered
with dismay that i was very uncharacteristically
wearing mascara. i wiped quickly under my eyes to
prevent any smudges. my hand was unblackened
when i pulled it away; maybe alice had known i
would need waterproof makeup.

"this is completely ridiculous. why are you crying?"
he demanded in frustration.

521 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"because i'm mad!"

"bella." he turned the full force of his scorching
golden eyes on me.

"what?" i muttered, distracted.

"humor me," he insisted.

his eyes were melting all my fury. it was impossible to
fight with him when he cheated like that. i gave in
with poor grace.

"fine," i pouted, unable to glare as effectively as i
would have liked.

"i'll go quietly. but you'll see. i'm way overdue for
more bad luck. i'll probably break my other leg. look
at this shoe! it's a death trap!" i held out my good leg
as evidence.

"hmmm." he stared at my leg longer than was
necessary. "remind me to thank alice for that
tonight."

"alice is going to be there?" that comforted me
slightly.

"with jasper, and emmett and rosalie," he
admitted. the feeling of comfort disappeared. there
had been no progress with rosalie, though i was on
quite good terms with her sometimes-husband.
emmett enjoyed having me around - he thought my
bizarre human reactions were hilarious or maybe it
was just the fact that i fell down a lot that he found
so funny. rosalie acted as if i didn't exist. while i

522 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
shook my head to dispel the direction my thoughts
had taken, i thought of something else.

"is charlie in on this?" i asked, suddenly suspicious.

"of course." he grinned, and then chuckled.
"apparently tyler wasn't, though."

i gritted my teeth. how tyler could be so delusional, i
couldn't imagine. at school, where charlie couldn't
interfere, edward and i were inseparable - except for
those rare sunny days.

we were at the school now; rosalie's red convertible
was conspicuous in the parking lot. the clouds were
thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through
far away in the west.

he got out and walked around the car to open my
door. he held out his hand.

i sat stubbornly in my seat, arms folded, feeling a
secret twinge of smugness. the lot was crowded with
people in formal dress: witnesses. he couldn't remove
me forcibly from the car as he might have if we'd been
alone.

he sighed. "when someone wants to kill you, you're
brave as a lion - and then when someone mentions
dancing" he shook his head. i gulped. dancing.

"bella, i won't let anything hurt you - not even
yourself. i won't let go of you once, i promise."

i thought about that and suddenly felt much better.
he could see that in my face.

523 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"there, now," he said gently, "it won't be so bad." he
leaned down and wrapped one arm around my waist.
i took his other hand and let him lift me from the car.

he kept his arm tightly around me, supporting me as
i limped toward the school.

in phoenix, they held proms in hotel ballrooms. this
dance was in the gym, of course. it was probably the
only room in town big enough for a dance. when we
got inside, i giggled. there were actual balloon arches
and twisted garlands of pastel crepe paper festooning
the walls.

"this looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," i
snickered.

"well," he muttered as we slowly approached the
ticket table - he was carrying most of my weight, but
i still had to shuffle and wobble my feet forward -
"there are more than enough vampires present." i
looked at the dance floor; a wide gap had formed in
the center of the floor, where two couples whirled
gracefully. the other dancers pressed to the sides of
the room to give them space - no one wanted to
stand in contrast with such radiance. emmett and
jasper were intimidating and flawless in classic
tuxedos. alice was striking in a black satin dress with
geometric cutouts that bared large triangles of her
snowy white skin. and rosalie was well, rosalie.
she was beyond belief. her vivid scarlet dress was
backless, tight to her calves where it flared into a
wide ruffled train, with a neckline that plunged to her
waist. i pitied every girl in the room, myself included.

524 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"do you want me to bolt the doors so you can
massacre the unsuspecting townsfolk?" i whispered
conspiratorially.

"and where do you fit into that scheme?" he glared.

"oh, i'm with the vampires, of course."

he smiled reluctantly. "anything to get out of
dancing."

"anything."

he bought our tickets, then turned me toward the
dance floor. i cringed against his arm and dragged my
feet.

"i've got all night," he warned.

eventually he towed me out to where his family was
twirling elegantly -

if in a style totally unsuitable to the present time and
music. i watched in horror.

"edward." my throat was so dry i could only manage a
whisper. "i honestly can't dance!" i could feel the
panic bubbling up inside my chest.

"don't worry, silly," he whispered back. "i can." he
put my arms around his neck and lifted me to slide
his feet under mine.

and then we were whirling, too.

"i feel like i'm five years old," i laughed after a few
minutes of effortless waltzing.

525 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you don't look five," he murmured, pulling me closer
for a second, so that my feet were briefly a foot from
the ground.

alice caught my eye on a turn and smiled in
encouragement - i smiled back. i was surprised to
realize that i was actually enjoying myself a little.

"okay, this isn't half bad," i admitted.

but edward was staring toward the doors, and his
face was angry.

"what is it?" i wondered aloud. i followed his gaze,
disoriented by the spinning, but finally i could see
what was bothering him. jacob black, not in a tux,
but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair
smoothed back into his usual ponytail, was crossing
the floor toward us. after the first shock of
recognition, i couldn't help but feel bad for jacob. he
was clearly uncomfortable - excruciatingly so. his
face was apologetic as his eyes met mine.

edward snarled very quietly.

"behave!" i hissed.

edward's voice was scathing. "he wants to chat with
you." jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and
apology even more evident on his face.

"hey, bella, i was hoping you would be here." jacob
sounded like he'd been hoping the exact opposite. but
his smile was just as warm as ever.

"hi, jacob." i smiled back. "what's up?"

526 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"can i cut in?" he asked tentatively, glancing at
edward for the first time. i was shocked to notice that
jacob didn't have to look up. he must have grown
half a foot since the first time i'd seen him. edward's
face was composed, his expression blank. his only
answer was to set me carefully on my feet, and take a
step back.

"thanks," jacob said amiably.

edward just nodded, looking at me intently before he
turned to walk away. jacob put his hands on my
waist, and i reached up to put my hands on his
shoulders.

"wow, jake, how tall are you now?"

he was smug. "six-two."

we weren't really dancing - my leg made that
impossible. instead we swayed awkwardly from side
to side without moving our feet. it was just as well;
the recent growth spurt had left him looking gangly
and uncoordinated, he was probably no better a
dancer than i was.

"so, how did you end up here tonight?" i asked
without true curiosity. considering edward's reaction,
i could guess.

"can you believe my dad paid me twenty bucks to
come to your prom?" he admitted, slightly ashamed.

"yes, i can," i muttered. "well, i hope you're enjoying
yourself, at least. seen anything you like?" i teased,
nodding toward a group of girls lined up against the
wall like pastel confections.
527 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"yeah," he sighed. "but she's taken." he glanced down
to meet my curious gaze for just a second - then we
both looked away, embarrassed.

"you look really pretty, by the way," he added shyly.

"um, thanks. so why did billy pay you to come here?"
i asked quickly, though i knew the answer.

jacob didn't seem grateful for the subject change; he
looked away, uncomfortable again. "he said it was a
'safe' place to talk to you. i swear the old man is
losing his mind."

i joined in his laughter weakly.

"anyway, he said that if i told you something, he
would get me that master cylinder i need," he
confessed with a sheepish grin.

"tell me, then. i want you to get your car finished." i
grinned back. at least jacob didn't believe any of this.
it made the situation a bit easier. against the wall,
edward was watching my face, his own face
expressionless. i saw a sophomore in a pink dress
eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem
to be aware of her.

jacob looked away again, ashamed. "don't get mad,
okay?"

"there's no way i'll be mad at you, jacob," i assured
him. "i won't even be mad at billy. just say what you
have to."

528 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"well - this is so stupid, i'm sorry, bella - he wants
you to break up with your boyfriend. he asked me to
tell you 'please.'" he shook his head in disgust.

"he's still superstitious, eh?"

"yeah. he was kind of over the top when you got
hurt down in phoenix. he didn't believe"jacob
trailed off self-consciously.

my eyes narrowed. "i fell."

"i know that," jacob said quickly.

"he thinks edward had something to do with me
getting hurt." it wasn't a question, and despite my
promise, i was angry.

jacob wouldn't meet my eyes. we weren't even
bothering to sway to the music, though his hands
were still on my waist, and mine around his neck.

"look, jacob, i know billy probably won't believe this,
but just so you know" - he looked at me now,
responding to the new earnestness in my voice -
"edward really did save my life. if it weren't for
edward and his father, i'd be dead."

"i know," he claimed, but he sounded like my sincere
words had affected him some. maybe he'd be able to
convince billy of this much, at least.

"hey, i'm sorry you had to come do this, jacob," i
apologized. "at any rate, you get your parts, right?"

"yeah," he muttered. he was still looking awkward
upset.

529 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"there's more?" i asked in disbelief.

"forget it," he mumbled, "i'll get a job and save the
money myself." i glared at him until he met my gaze.
"just spit it out, jacob."

"it's so bad."

"i don't care. tell me," i insisted.

"okay but, geez, this sounds bad." he shook his
head. "he said to tell you, no, to warn you, that -
and this is his plural, not mine" - he lifted one hand
from my waist and made little quotations marks in
the air

- '"we'll be watching.'" he watched warily for my
reaction. it sounded like something from a mafia
movie. i laughed out loud.

"sorry you had to do this, jake," i snickered.

"i don't mind that much." he grinned in relief. his
eyes were appraising as they raked quickly over my
dress. "so, should i tell him you said to butt the hell
out?" he asked hopefully.

"no," i sighed. "tell him i said thanks. i know he
means well." the song ended, and i dropped my arms.

his hands hesitated at my waist, and he glanced at
my bum leg. "do you want to dance again? or can i
help you get somewhere?" edward answered for me.
"that's all right, jacob. i'll take it from here." jacob
flinched, and stared wide-eyed at edward, who stood
just beside us.

530 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"hey, i didn't see you there," he mumbled. "i guess i'll
see you around, bella." he stepped back, waving
halfheartedly.

i smiled. "yeah, i'll see you later."

"sorry," he said again before he turned for the door.
edward's arms wound around me as the next song
started. it was a little up-tempo for slow dancing, but
that didn't seem to concern him. i leaned my head
against his chest, content.

"feeling better?" i teased.

"not really," he said tersely.

"don't be mad at billy," i sighed. "he just worries
about me for charlie's sake. it's nothing personal."

"i'm not mad at billy," he corrected in a clipped voice.
"but his son is irritating me."

i pulled back to look at him. his face was very
serious.

"why?"

"first of all, he made me break my promise."

i stared at him in confusion.

he half-smiled. "i promised i wouldn't let go of you
tonight," he explained.

"oh. well, i forgive you."

"thanks. but there's something else." edward
frowned. i waited patiently.

531 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"he called you pretty," he finally continued, his frown
deepening.

"that's practically an insult, the way you look right
now. you're much more than beautiful."

i laughed. "you might be a little biased."

"i don't think that's it. besides, i have excellent
eyesight." we were twirling again, my feet on his as he
held me close.

"so are you going to explain the reason for all of this?"
i wondered. he looked down at me, confused, and i
glared meaningfully at the crepe paper.

he considered for a moment, and then changed
direction, spinning me through the crowd to the back
door of the gym. i caught a glimpse of jessica and
mike dancing, staring at me curiously. jessica waved,
and i smiled back quickly. angela was there, too,
looking blissfully happy in the arms of little ben
cheney; she didn't look up from his eyes, a head
lower than hers. lee and samantha, lauren, glaring
toward us, with conner; i could name every face that
spiraled past me. and then we were outdoors, in the
cool, dim light of a fading sunset.

as soon as we were alone, he swung me up into his
arms, and carried me across the dark grounds till he
reached the bench beneath the shadow of the
madrone trees. he sat there, keeping me cradled
against his chest. the moon was already up, visible
through the gauzy clouds, and his face glowed pale in
the white light. his mouth was hard, his eyes
troubled.
532 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"the point?" i prompted softly.

he ignored me, staring up at the moon.

"twilight, again," he murmured. "another ending. no
matter how perfect the day is, it always has to end."

"some things don't have to end," i muttered through
my teeth, instantly tense.

he sighed.

"i brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally
answering my question, "because i don't want you to
miss anything. i don't want my presence to take
anything away from you, if i can help it. i want you to
be human. i want your life to continue as it would
have if i'd died in nineteen-eighteen like i should
have."

i shuddered at his words, and then shook my head
angrily. "in what strange parallel dimension would i
ever have gone to prom of my own free will? if you
weren't a thousand times stronger than me, i would
never have let you get away with this."

he smiled briefly, but it didn't touch his eyes. "it
wasn't so bad, you said so yourself."

"that's because i was with you."

we were quiet for a minute; he stared at the moon
and i stared at him. i wished there was some way to
explain how very uninterested i was in a normal
human life.

533 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"will you tell me something?" he asked, glancing
down at me with a slight smile.

"don't i always?"

"just promise you'll tell me," he insisted, grinning. i
knew i was going to regret this almost instantly.
"fine."

"you seemed honestly surprised when you figured out
that i was taking you here," he began.

"i was," i interjected.

"exactly," he agreed. "but you must have had some
other theory i'm curious - what did you think i
was dressing you up for?" yes, instant regret. i
pursed my lips, hesitating. "i don't want to tell you."

"you promised," he objected.

"i know."

"what's the problem?"

i knew he thought it was mere embarrassment
holding me back. "i think it will make you mad - or
sad."

his brows pulled together over his eyes as he thought
that through. "i still want to know. please?"

i sighed. he waited.

"well i assumed it was some kind of occasion.
but i didn't think it would be some trite human
thing prom!" i scoffed.

534 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"human?" he asked flatly. he'd picked up on the key
word. i looked down at my dress, fidgeting with a
stray piece of chiffon. he waited in silence.

"okay," i confessed in a rush. "so i was hoping that
you might have changed your mind that you were
going to change me, after all." a dozen emotions
played across his face. some i recognized: anger
pain

and then he seemed to collect himself and his
expression became amused.

"you thought that would be a black tie occasion, did
you?" he teased, touching the lapel of his tuxedo
jacket.

i scowled to hide my embarrassment. "i don't know
how these things work. to me, at least, it seems more
rational than prom does." he was still grinning. "it's
not funny," i said.

"no, you're right, it's not," he agreed, his smile fading.
"i'd rather treat it like a joke, though, than believe
you're serious."

"but i am serious."

he sighed deeply. "i know. and you're really that
willing?" the pain was back in his eyes. i bit my lip
and nodded.

"so ready for this to be the end," he murmured,
almost to himself, "for this to be the twilight of your
life, though your life has barely started. you're ready
to give up everything."

535 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"it's not the end, it's the beginning," i disagreed under
my breath.

"i'm not worth it," he said sadly.

"do you remember when you told me that i didn't see
myself very clearly?" i asked, raising my eyebrows.
"you obviously have the same blindness."

"i know what i am."

i sighed.

but his mercurial mood shifted on me. he pursed his
lips, and his eyes were probing. he examined my face
for a long moment.

"you're ready now, then?" he asked.

"um." i gulped. "yes?"

he smiled, and inclined his head slowly until his cold
lips brushed against the skin just under the corner of
my jaw.

"right now?" he whispered, his breath blowing cool on
my neck. i shivered involuntarily.

"yes," i whispered, so my voice wouldn't have a
chance to break. if he thought i was bluffing, he was
going to be disappointed. i'd already made this
decision, and i was sure. it didn't matter that my
body was rigid as a plank, my hands balled into fists,
my breathing erratic

he chuckled darkly, and leaned away. his face did
look disappointed.

536 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer
"you can't really believe that i would give in so easily,"
he said with a sour edge to his mocking tone.

"a girl can dream."

his eyebrows rose. "is that what you dream about?
being a monster?"

"not exactly," i said, frowning at his word choice.
monster, indeed.

"mostly i dream about being with you forever."

his expression changed, softened and saddened by
the subtle ache in my voice.

"bella." his fingers lightly traced the shape of my lips.
"i will stay with you - isn't that enough?"

i smiled under his fingertips. "enough for now." he
frowned at my tenacity. no one was going to
surrender tonight. he exhaled, and the sound was
practically a growl.

i touched his face. "look," i said. "i love you more
than everything else in the world combined. isn't that
enough?"

"yes, it is enough," he answered, smiling. "enough for
forever." and he leaned down to press his cold lips
once more to my throat.

537 p a g e twilight - stephanie meyer

<|endofdoc|>

